In this study, a series of ground motions with a wide range of vertical shaking intensity were applied to three-dimensional models of bridges isolated with triple pendulum bearings (TPBs) that both excluded the vertical component (2D shaking) and included the vertical component (3D motion). Bridge response under 2D and 3D shaking was then compared to investigate the direct effect of vertical shaking. The objective of this work was to evaluate the amplification of base shear under 3D motion, and to develop a simplified method to predict base-shear amplification.
An existing ground-motion suite was selected that had been fitted to a target horizontal spectrum, and vertical components were scaled individually to fit a target vertical spectrum that corresponded to the target horizontal spectrum. The target vertical spectrum was created based on NEHRP recommended seismic provisions [FEMA 2009b]. Ground motions were divided into three groups based on peak vertical ground acceleration (PGAV). The PGAV intensity ranges were: Group 1 = 0.8g and above (High Intensity), Group 2 = 0.5g to 0.7g (Moderate Intensity), and Group 3 = 0.2g to 0.4g (Low Intensity).
Multi-span concrete box girder bridges were selected for this study as they are a prominent bridge type in California and are suitable for seismic isolation. A three-span, 45-ft wide, multi-column bent bridge was established as the Base Model bridge. The isolation system friction coefficients were µ1 = 0.02 and µ2 = 0.08, and isolation periods were T1 = 1 sec and T2 = 3.5 sec for sliding on first and second slope of the backbone curve, respectively. A bridge parameter variation was implemented to evaluate the effect of various parameter variations on the amplification of base shear. Also, isolation system parameter variations were applied to the Base Model bridge. The Base Model bridge and all variations were modeled in OpenSees using the spine-modeling approach, and TPBs were modeled using the TripleFrictionPendulum element.
Response histories were compared for a representative motion from each ground-motion group under 2D and 3D shaking. Peak responses were compared under 2D and 3D shaking for all motions. Modal and spectral analyses were also conducted to understand dynamic properties and behavior of the bridges under vertical motion. Deck acceleration spectral response at different locations revealed that higher modes were excited.
A simplified theory was also proposed, leading to a method to predict the amplified base-shear coefficient for 3D shaking from the base-shear coefficient for 2D shaking. Thus, the method is applicable for bridge design based on equivalent static analysis. The theory predicts that the amplification of base shear is proportional to (uo/Reff + m), where uo is peak isolator displacement, Reff is the radius and m the friction coefficient of the effective pendulum mechanism, as well as PGAV, thus accounting for any variation of isolation system parameters in the estimate. Three different amplification factors, ν, were considered: ν = 0.5, ν = 1.0, and ν = Sa(Tv)/PGAV. The last, ν = Sa(Tv)/PGAV, can be interpreted as the effective or realized vertical acceleration at the isolators and is the spectral acceleration at the period of the dominant vertical mode.
The proposed method with different amplification factors was evaluated using two different error estimates: the amplification error or AE, and the base-shear normalized error or BSNE. The simplified method with a different amplification factor was assessed over a range of isolation parameters and bridge parameter variations. Key conclusions from this work are as follows. 
Response history analysis over the suite of motions demonstrated that the horizontal response of the bridge was amplified when vertical motion was included. The transverse-direction base shear in the Base Model bridge was amplified by factors ranging from 1.39 to 3.59 for the Group 1 motions, 1.12 to 1.52 for the Group 2 motions, and 1.21 to 1.26 in Group 3 motions. The longitudinal-direction base shear in the Base Model bridge was amplified by factors ranging from 1.83 to 2.23 for the Group 1 motions, 1.03 to 1.46 for the Group 2 motions, and 1.18 to 1.47 for Group 3 motions. These amplification factors imply that exclusion of the vertical component of shaking could lead to underestimation of demand shear forces on bridge piers. Base shear was amplified more in the transverse direction than in longitudinal direction, which is believed to be due, in part, to excited horizontal–vertical coupled modes.
A transverse–vertical modal coupling was observed in the Base Model bridge by examining spectral responses at various locations on the bridge. Mode 7, the vertical mode with the highest mass participation, was excited under 3D shaking. The vertical motion introduced a high-frequency axial force variation to the isolators, which was transferred to the isolator horizontal forces since the horizontal friction force is proportional to the axial force. It was determined that high-frequency oscillation affected the base shear at a period of around 0.2 sec, which is the period of the second transverse mode and, consequently, excited the second transverse mode under 3D motion only. This type of coupling has been observed in multi-story buildings, and the analysis here shows that such coupling is also possible in bridges.
Modal analysis of the various bridge models in the parameter study showed that all bridges have a 2C/3C/4C-shape vertical mode with high modal-mass participation that is expected to be the dominant vertical mode. In many of the bridge models, the vertical mode was closely spaced to a second transverse mode. Spectral responses were not examined in detail for these bridges, but modal coupling is expected for those models with closely spaced coupled horizontal–vertical modes. This type of transverse–vertical modal coupling should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis for bridges with the potential for being subjected to high-intensity vertical ground shaking. Because the effects of such coupling were not evident from analysis of the base-shear coefficient alone, the greatest impact of the coupling is expected to be amplification of mid-span accelerations, which may not be that significant for bridges.
Regarding error estimates, the AE was found to be unreasonably large when amplification of the base shear from 2D to 3D is close to 0. Thus, the AE was not found to be a meaningful measure of the accuracy of the simplified method, whereas the BSNE evaluated directly the error in the total base-shear estimate relative to the simulated base shear. The BSNE was found to be a reasonable error measure and is recommended to evaluate the accuracy of the simplified method.
Amplification of base shear decreased with the increase of effective period (or radius Reff of the effective pendulum mechanism) and increased with an increasing friction coefficient m. The proposed method to estimate base shear for 3D shaking well captures these observed trends in the base-shear coefficient vs isolation system parameters. The average BSNE was essentially independent of the variation in isolation system parameters. Differences in base-shear amplification for bridge superstructure parameter variations were insignificant, and the simplified method also estimated base shear for 3D shaking accurately across the range of bridge model variations.
Large dispersion of the BSNE was observed over the suite of ground motions. While the amplification factor ν = 0.5 led to the lowest average BSNE, using this amplification factor could lead to the possibility of significantly under-predicting the base-shear coefficient for an individual ground motion. On average, using an amplification factor ν = 1.0 overestimated the base-shear coefficient by 15–30% (i.e., the average BSNE ranged between 15–30%). Application of the simplified method with ν = 1.0 is recommended for estimates of response that are sufficient but not overly conservative. Applying an amplification factor consistent with the vertical spectral acceleration of the dominant vertical mode of the bridge was unnecessarily conservative for most motions. In other words, dynamic amplification of the ground motion was not generally observed.
Future work is advisable to fine tune the estimation method for implementation in bridge design codes. Analysis with a statistically significant number of ground motions and range of shaking intensities, along with model variations. should be used to determine a “best fit” value of the amplification factor. Because of the complexities associated with high-intensity shaking, determination of a threshold PGAV is envisioned above which the simplified method cannot reliably be applied, and 3D RHA procedures are recommended. Implementation of a PGAV limit may improve the accuracy of the estimation method in the applicable range of ground-motion intensity.
