Ground motions play a crucial role in modeling and predicting the response of structural systems. For most investigations, ground motions are selected and scaled for a target intensity or target spectrum in the horizontal direction only, without regard to the vertical component. There are very limited studies evaluating the effect of vertical ground motions on bridges. In addition, most literature on ground-motion selection focuses on horizontal components of motion only.

To avoid challenges in selecting and scaling ground-motion triplets, the strategy used herein was to select a well-vetted, pre-defined suite of horizontal strong ground-motion records that were fit to a target spectrum. For this study, the vertical components of those records were amplitude-scaled independently to best fit a target vertical spectrum that corresponded to the target horizontal spectrum. The selected suite consisted of 11 recorded ground motions corresponding to shallow crustal earthquakes in active tectonic regions that incorporate near-fault effects [Carlton 2014].
The motions were amplitude scaled to match a 5%-damped target acceleration response spectrum based on the 2008 NGA ground-motion prediction equations (GMPEs) given by Abrahamson and Silva [2008], Boore and Atkinson [2008], Campbell and Bozorgnia [2008], Chiou and Youngs [2008], and Idriss [2008]. Parameters used for estimating this spectrum were Mw = 6.7 (a moment magnitude of 6.7), FRV = 1 and FNM = 0 (a reverse-type-fault failing mechanism), ZTOR = 0 (surface rupture), and δ = 45 (45° fault plane). Figure 2.1 shows the target median (m) and median plus/minus ± one standard deviation (m ± s) spectral acceleration.
The procedure used to scale the ground motions to best fit the target spectrum was as follows [Carlton 2014]: first, motions were rotated to the direction that maximized the spectral acceleration at a period T = 1 sec. The code SigmaSpectra [IICGE 2019] was used to select the best suite of ground motions from a larger pool of rotated motions. Individual motions were amplitude scaled to minimize the sum-square-of-the-error relative to the target spectrum. The root-mean-square-error (RMSE) for a suite of scaled motions is defined as:
where np is the number of points (periods) in the response spectra to be targeted; and  and  are the target spectral acceleration and the mean spectral acceleration of the suite of scaled ground motions for the ith period, respectively. The spectral values are assumed to be log-normally distributed. Motions were selected such that RMSE for the suite was minimized.
After the suite of motions was selected, scale factors for individual motions were further increased or decreased while keeping the average scaling factors constant so that the suite as a whole also matched the target standard deviation. The best scaling factor for each record were determined by the Centroid Method as illustrated by Kottke and Rathje [2008]. Table 2.1 below lists the ground motions selected by Carlton [2014] and their relevant statistics. The motions can also be found in the database created for the PEER transportation research program; see Baker et al. 

Since vertical motions were not considered in development of the ground-motion suite [Carlton 2014], a similar procedure was adopted herein to scale the vertical motions. First, the target vertical spectral acceleration, Sa,V was developed from the target horizontal spectrum based on NEHRP recommended seismic provisions [FEMA 2009(b)]. Figure 2.2 shows a vertical response spectrum according to these guidelines. The vertical spectral shape resembles a standard code horizontal spectrum [ASCE 2017] but with fixed transition periods at 0.05 sec and 0.15 sec that determine the start and end of the constant acceleration region. For periods T > 0.15 sec, Sa,V is calculated as

where CV is the vertical coefficient that depends on site class and ranges from 0.7 to 1.5; SDS is the design spectral response acceleration parameter at short periods and represents the largest horizontal spectral acceleration. When CV takes the value of 1.5, the peak vertical spectral acceleration Sa,V = 1.2SDS, i.e., the vertical to horizontal (V/H) ratio = 1.2.
The NEHRP vertical spectrum is based on a standard design spectrum that has constant spectral acceleration over a range of short periods. Because the target horizontal spectrum of Carlton [2014] reflects the GMPE and does not have a constant spectral acceleration region, the shape of the target vertical spectrum developed here was modified from the NEHRP spectrum. Two regions for the target vertical spectrum were defined. In the first region, Sa,V varies linearly from 0.3CVSDS at T = 0 sec to 0.8CVSDS at T = 0.15 sec, which resembles the shape of the horizontal spectrum. For T > 0.15 sec, Sa,V is determined by Equation (2.2), which is consistent with the NEHRP target spectrum. Assumed coefficients were Cv = 1.5 and SDS = 1.38, which is the largest spectral acceleration of the target horizontal spectrum at T = 0.2 sec. Figure 2.3 illustrates the target vertical spectrum.
To scale the vertical components to best fit this target spectrum, the following procedure was followed. First, a scale factor was identified for each horizontal rotated motion such that it best fit the median horizontal target spectrum. This scale factor is hereafter referred to as “horizontal best fit factor.” A horizontal adjustment ratio A ¢ was calculated by dividing the scale factor reported in Carlton [2014] by the horizontal best fit factor. The adjustment ratio represents the additional scaling of individual motions to represent the dispersion in the target spectrum. Likewise, the vertical components of these motions were also amplitude scaled to best fit the vertical target spectrum; this scale factor is referred to as “vertical best fit factor.” Final vertical-component scale factors were derived by multiplying the vertical best fit factors by A¢. Essentially, the scale factors for vertical motions were adjusted comparable to the horizontal motions to match the m ± s target spectrum. This procedure ensures that motions with high-intensity horizontal components have high-intensity vertical components as well.

To better understand the influence of intensity on the bridge response, the ground motions have been divided into three groups based on scaled vertical PGA intensity ranges; see Table 2.2. The vertical PGA (PGAV) intensity ranges are as follows: Group 1 = 0.8g and above (High Intensity), Group 2 = 0.5g to 0.7g (Moderate Intensity), and Group 3 = 0.2g to 0.4g (Low Intensity). Table 2.2 indicates the scaled PGA in the vertical direction and in the two horizontal directions (PGAT and PGAL to be applied in the bridge transverse and longitudinal directions, respectively), as well as the final scale factors and adjustment factors for horizontal and vertical components. Figures 2.4 and 2.5 show acceleration spectra for individual scaled motions plotted against the target spectrum for horizontal and vertical components, respectively. In each plot, the Group 1, Group 2, and Group 3 spectra are identified by color. By inspection, the spectral intensities of the vertical motions (per group) are roughly proportional to those of the horizontal motions. Furthermore, Group 1, Group 2, and Group 3 motions correlate well to m + s, m, and m - s horizontal target spectra, respectively; see Figure 2.4.

Bridges are classified into various categories according to design and construction methodologies, materials used, and other characteristics such as single vs. multiple spans, integral vs. bearing connection of superstructure to substructure, etc. Ramanathan [2012] studied the California bridge inventory utilizing the National Bridge Inventory (NBI) database [2010]. According to that study, three classes of bridges (multi-span continuous concrete box-girder, multi-span continuous slab, and multi-span continuous concrete girder) account for 45% of the total bridge inventory. Other bridge classes in California include concrete and steel culverts, concrete tunnels, concrete and steel bridges with other structural systems, cast/wrought iron, masonry, wood/timber, and aluminum bridges. Table 3.1 shows the major bridge classes with their count and the percentage of total inventory.
The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of vertical motion on isolated bridges. With that goal in mind, a variety of bridges archetypes, commonly found in the seismically active regions of California, were considered.  Clearly, isolation is not suitable for bridge classes listed in Table 3.1. Multi-span continuous concrete box-girder bridges (MSCBG) and multi-span continuous steel or concrete girder bridges are the most suitable choice for seismic isolation because of the convenience of placing the isolators directly between the substructure bent cap and the superstructure girders. With simply supported bridges, different displacements can arise in each span, resulting in pounding. Pounding in isolated bridges is undesirable because it can induce additional shear forces in isolators. Because single-span bridges tend to be limited in length, they are not very flexible in the vertical direction and vertical shaking might not affect their response.
In California, MSCBG is the preferred bridge archetype for use with seismic isolation [Kartoum 2018]. In MSCBG bridges, isolation bearings are placed between the deck and the bent cap. A column cap provides support for the bearing installation. Bearings are also provided at the abutment. Figure 3.1 shows the typical assembly of bearings between the bent cap and the superstructure in MSCBG bridges. Only MSCBG bridges are investigated herein because of their wide presence and suitability for seismic isolation. Also, the bridge response is not expected to be affected directly by the bridge type, but rather by variation in dynamic properties that arises from parameter variation.

This section describes the parameter variations considered explored the influence of vertical motion on bridge response. Parameter variations include span length, number of spans, width of deck, number of columns per bent, and column height (substructure stiffness). Considering these parameter variations, eight different bridges were modeled and analyzed by changing one bridge parameter at a time and keeping the other parameters constant. All bridges were assumed to be isolated with TPBs. The bridges and their properties are tabulated in Table 3.2. The span length of the approach spans are 0.8 times the length of intermediate spans.
Bridge 1 is a three-span bridge (120-ft-long spans) with two-column bents. Bridge 1 was considered a baseline to evaluate the effect of other parameter variations and is referred to as the Base Model bridge. Figure 3.2 details the Base Model bridge with dimensions.
Bridge 2 is a four-span bridge and Bridge 3 is a two-span bridge.
Bridges 4 and 5 are both three-span bridges but have increased span lengths of 135 ft and 160 ft, respectively, and increased depth of the deck to 5.4 ft and 6.4 ft, respectively.
Bridge 6 has increased deck width (from 45 ft to 90 ft), 10 cells, and four columns per bent.
Bridge 7 has a reduced deck width of 35 ft, two cells, and is reduced to a single 6-ft-diameter column bent.
Relative to the standard column height (20 ft), Bridge 8 has a reduced column height of 15 ft. 
Isolation system parameter variations were also applied to the Base Model bridge to investigate the influence of friction coefficient and isolation period on bridge response to combined horizontal and vertical ground motions. Table 3.3 lists the isolator parameter variations considered for Base Model bridge. The symbols µ2 and T2 correspond to friction coefficient and pendulum period, respectively, associated with sliding on the outer sliding surfaces. The TPB model is described more fully in Section 3.3. Other bridges in Table 3.2 were analyzed with the parameters of Iso System No. 6 in Table 3.3.


Three-dimensional computational models of the isolated bridge model variations presented above were developed in OpenSees [2019], partly based on Aviram et al. [2008]. Modeling assumptions for each bridge element are discussed below. Unless otherwise noted, assumptions are for the Base Model bridge, with implementation of parameter variations discussed as needed.
Figure 3.3 shows an overview of the Base Model bridge model. The bridge was modeled using the spine-model approach in OpenSees. The superstructure was divided into multiple elements per span, with the tributary mass lumped at the nodes. Superstructure nodes were connected to isolators with rigid links. Cap–beam elements were also connected to the base of the isolators and the top node of the column via rigid links. Cap beams and columns were modeled as elastic-frame elements. The column base was attached to translational and rotational springs representing the foundation stiffness. Abutments were modeled such that isolators can displace freely without restrictions; end nodes of abutments were attached to abutment foundation springs. Modeling details for each bridge member are discussed next.
The bridge superstructure (deck and girders) is capacity protected and assumed to remain elastic. The basic principle of isolation is to reduce the demands on the bridge structure and constrain the nonlinearity to the isolators. The bridge superstructure was modeled using elastic beam–column elements with uncracked section properties for prestressed concrete; the contribution of steel was neglected. Section properties were calculated separately for each bridge and assigned to 3D beam–column elements. The assumed section properties are tabulated in Table 3.4. IXX and IYY are the moments of inertia with respect to x- and y-axes respectively, and J is the torsional constant, of the deck with girders cross section.

The superstructure node was assigned at the center-of-gravity of the section. The superstructure was divided into 10 elements per span, and translational masses were lumped at nodes based on the tributary length Ltrib and cross-sectional area Adeck. The translational nodal mass was computed as:
The unit mass of concrete assigned to the material was m = 4.471 lb-sec2/ft4, based on the assumed weight of normal concrete w = 143.96 lb/ft3 [Caltrans 2004]. For example, the nodal mass for Base Model bridge would be computed using a tributary length Ltrib = 12 ft (one tenth of the intermediate span length of 120 ft) and the cross-sectional area Adeck from Table 3.4.
Rotational mass assignment is also important to capture fundamental mode shapes of the bridge in the transverse direction. The rotational mass of the superstructure about the longitudinal axis, Mxx, (Figure 3.4) was calculated and assigned using the following formula.
Most of the bridge models listed in Table 3.2 contain multi-column bents; only one bridge model used a single-column bent. The width of the deck dictates the number of columns in the bent. For isolated bridges, the column base must be fixed because the column top acts as a pinned support in the bridge longitudinal direction. The cap beam is a concrete element that ties the columns together and through framing action resists acting lateral loads and displacement in the transverse direction. The cap beam also facilitates isolator installation and connection between the superstructure and column bents in an isolated bridge.
Figure 3.5 illustrates the modeling details of the single and multi-column bent. The cap beam was modeled as an elastic beam–column element in OpenSees, with section properties representing the plan dimensions. The dropped cap beam was connected by a rigid link to both columns below and isolators above; see Figure 3.5. In this rigid link element, the constrained nodes move together in space as a rigid body. The rigid link connection facilitates moment and force transfer between the elements of the bent. Isolation reduces the demand on the sub-structure such that it remains elastic during dynamic loading. Hence, the columns were also modeled using 3D elastic beam–column elements.
The abutments facilitate access of traffic to and from the bridge. Typically, bridges have either seat-type abutments or integral-type abutments. In a seat-type abutment, the bridge superstructure load is transferred through bearings to the abutment seat, and the connection is designed as an expansion joint. Isolated bridges use seat-type abutments where the typical bearings are replaced by isolation bearings. In a non-isolated bridge, a seat-type abutment may have an unrestricted capacity for displacement across the joint or it may be restrained by the abutment backwall in the longitudinal direction and by shear keys in transverse direction. Seismically isolated bridges are generally designed to allow free movement of the superstructure and isolators at the abutments because pounding may introduce additional high shear forces in the isolators and hence the columns. Therefore, the isolators were modeled to move freely at both abutment ends without restriction. In the Base Model bridge, abutment base nodes were modeled with foundation springs, as described next.
Foundations transmit the service and ultimate loads from the superstructure and columns to the underlying soil. Possible types of bridge foundations are spread footing, integral pile/column, and pile-supported footings. The type of bridge foundation is governed by loadings requirements, soil conditions, overhead clearance, existing utilities, and its proximity to existing facilities. Mangalathu [2017] performed a performance-based grouping methodology to group the box-girder bridges in California for regional seismic assessment. His study modeled and analyzed different foundation systems and soil profiles, and documented the development of statistical distribution functions to represent the variation of foundation translational and rotational stiffnesses for spread footings and pile foundations.
In this study, the Base Model bridge was modeled with spread footings below the columns and abutments. These spread footings were modeled as elastic translational and rotational springs located at the center-of-gravity of the footing; see Figure 3.6. The foundation springs were connected by a rigid link to the column base. The assumed translational spring stiffness, Kh, was 1000 kip/in. in both directions, and rotational spring stiffness, Kr, was 30 ´ 106 kip-in./rad for rotation about the transverse direction and 25 ´ 106 kip-in./rad for rotation about the longitudinal direction per column. These were based on mean values of the distribution functions for spread footings under a multiple column bent [Mangalathu 2017]. Foundation springs, added to the Base Model bridge only, were observed to have no effect on the axial force and base shear. Therefore, other bridges listed in Table 3.2 were modeled as fixed at the base without foundation springs.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, triple pendulum bearings or TPBs are a type of friction pendulum bearing characterized by multiple concave surfaces upon which sliding occurs. Due to multiple sliding surfaces, TPBs are more compact than other types of friction pendulum bearings. The bridges in this study were isolated with TPBs, although the observations regarding the influence of vertical shaking are expected to apply generally to any type of spherical sliding bearing.
Figure 3.7 presents a general configuration of a TPB, which consists of an inner slider, two articulated sliders, and two main concave surfaces. The radii of these curved surfaces, R1, R2, and R3, and the friction coefficients of the sliding interfaces, µ1, µ2, and µ3, determine the hysteretic response of the TPBs. Parameters d1, d2, and d3 represent displacement limits of the pendulum mechanisms, and h1, h2, and h3 are slider heights; see Figure 3.7. A TPB provides different pendulum mechanisms under different levels of shaking intensity. The normalized backbone curve of the TPB is presented in Figure 3.8, and the different related sliding mechanisms are shown in Figure 3.9 and explained hereafter.
The effective radii of the spherical surfaces are: L1 = R1 – h1; L2 = R2 – h2; and L3 = R3 – h3. In the first stage, shown in Figure 3.9, sliding occurs between Interfaces 2 and 3 when the normalized horizontal force, , exceeds the friction coefficient µ1. Here,  is the horizontal force that is normalized by the instantaneous acting axial force, not the constant weight of the superstructure. Since the axial force changes because of vertical motion, the horizontal force also changes accordingly. The inner slider has a small spherical radius, R1, resulting in a relatively large normalized stiffness (stiffness normalized by axial force), k1 = 1/(2L1) (Figure 3.8), and the maximum displacement is  = 2L1 (µ2 - µ1). The friction coefficient µ1 between these two surfaces is low, such that sliding takes place under small earthquake intensity.
In the second stage of sliding, the normalized horizontal force, , exceeds the friction coefficient, µ2, and the inner slider slides on the upper articulated slider (Interface 3), while, simultaneously, the lower articulated slider slides on the bottom concave plate (Interface 1) (Figure 3.9). The normalized stiffness of this stage is k2 = 1/(L1 + L2), and the maximum displacement is   = L1 (µ2 + µ3 - 2µ1) + L2 (µ3 - µ2).
In the third stage of sliding (Figure 3.9), the lower articulated slider slides on the bottom concave plate (Interface 1), and the upper articulated slider slides on the top concave plate (Interface 4). The third stage of sliding starts when the normalized horizontal force  acting on the isolators exceeds the friction coefficient µ3. The normalized stiffness of backbone curve of the third stage is k3 = 1/ (L2 + L3), and the maximum displacement is  =  + (d2/L2 + µ2 - µ3) (L2 + L3).
When the normalized horizontal force acting on the isolator exceeds  = µ2 + d2/L2, the fourth stage of sliding is initiated (Figure 3.9). The inner slider slides on the lower articulated slider (Interface 2), and the upper articulated slider slides on the top concave plate (Interface 4). In this fourth stage of sliding, the normalized stiffness of the backbone curve is k4 = 1/(L1 + L3), and the maximum displacement is =  + (d3/L3 + µ3 – d2/L2 - µ2) (L1 + L3).
The fifth stage of sliding is activated when the normalized horizontal force on the isolators exceeds = µ3 + d3/L3. Sliding occurs between Interfaces 2 and 3: that is, the inner slider slides between the two articulated sliders. The normalized stiffness in this stage is k5 = 1/(2L1), and the maximum displacement is  = 2d1 + d2 + d3 + (L1/L3) d3 – (L1/L2) d2. This is the last stage of sliding before the bearing reaches its displacement limit; it comes in contact with the restraining rings of the articulated sliders and cannot go beyond without incurring damage. At the maximum displacement,, the corresponding normalized horizontal force is  = µ1 + d1/L1 + d3/L3

The normalized backbone curve used in this study for the Base Model bridge is shown in Figure 3.10. The parameters were selected in such a way that sliding stages 2 through 4 collapse into a single stage. Specifically, the design parameters of the upper and lower concave plates were selected such that: effective lengths L2 = L3, friction coefficients µ2 = µ3, and displacement limits d2 = d3. Based on these assumptions, the normalized stiffnesses for the first and second stages of sliding are: k1 = 1/(2L1), and k2 = 1/(2L2). The periods associated with individual sliding stages on the normalized force-displacement curve are defined by:

where ki is the normalized stiffness = 1/(2Li), and g is the gravitational constant. For the normalized backbone curve shown in Figure 3.10, L1 = 4.9 in. corresponding to T1 = 1 sec, and L2 = 60 in. corresponding to T2 = 3.5 sec. The friction coefficients were selected as µ1 = 0.02 and µ2 = 0.08. Displacement capacities are d1 = 0.8 in. and d2 = 14.7 in., which were selected to provide sufficient displacement capacity so that large displacement stiffening would not be engaged. A vertical stiffness was assigned corresponding to a vertical period of 0.03 sec, as TPB bearings are very stiff in the vertical direction.
The TPBs were modeled using the TripleFrictionPendulum element [Dao et al. 2013] in OpenSees. This element is capable of capturing vertical–horizontal coupling and bidirectional coupling in the two horizontal directions. Past analytical studies using this element have replicated the response observed in the full-scale experiment at E-defense shake table in Japan.

This chapter presents a simplified method to estimate the amplification of base shear in 3D shaking relative to 2D shaking. Section 5.1 presents a theoretical basis and proposes equations for the estimating the base-shear amplification due to vertical shaking. The theory is applicable to any spherical sliding bearing type isolation system. Two theories are proposed and followed by examples demonstrating application of those theories. Section 5.2 discusses methods to analyze the error in the estimated base shear relative to the observed base shear. Two different measures of error are developed: the amplification factor error and the base-shear normalized error. Amplified base-shear estimates and computed errors for all motions are presented and evaluated.

A theory is proposed here to estimate the amplification of base shear due to the vertical motion. The horizontal force of a spherical sliding bearing, based on a single pendulum mechanism, was given in Equation (1.1). This equation is a reasonable approximation of the resisting force of multi-spherical bearings when the response is dominated by the outer pendulum mechanism and represents the base shear in a system with many isolators. Thus, Equation (1.1), expressed in terms of system base shear, Vb, is repeated here for convenience:

where W is the weight of the superstructure,  is the effective radius of curvature (corresponding to the period of the dominant sliding mechanism), µ is the friction coefficient of dominant pendulum mechanism, and u is the isolator displacement. Dividing Equation (5.1) by the bridge weight, W, rearranging, and taking the peak over time, the following is obtained:

where Vb,2D is the peak base shear when subjected to 2D (horizontal only) acceleration, and uo represents the peak bearing displacement. Equation (5.2) can be applied in either the longitudinal or transverse direction.
As mentioned previously, the horizontal base shear in a spherical sliding bearing isolation system is dependent on the axial force acting on isolators. When vertical acceleration is considered, the system base shear should be determined from the instantaneous normal force, N, on the isolators rather than the static weight of the structure:

The system normal force, N, varies with time according to

where m is the total mass, and  is the vertical acceleration at the isolators. Accordingly, the component of the base shear due to vertical shaking can be estimated as:

where Vb,V is the horizontal force due to vertical acceleration only, and is the peak vertical acceleration over time. Thus, an additional component of base shear arises during vertical shaking that is dependent on the vertical acceleration. Normalizing Equation (5.5) by the superstructure weight leads to:

where ν is an amplification factor representing the amplification of the vertical acceleration from the ground to the structure. Thus Vb,V/W simplifies to:

The total base-shear coefficient can be estimated as

The estimation is exact if the peak horizontal displacement and peak vertical acceleration occur at the same time. Otherwise, Equation (5.9) will give a conservative estimate of the amplified base shear.
To apply the theory, different values of the amplification factor ν are considered. Assuming ν = 1 is consistent with the peak vertical acceleration at the isolators being equal to the PGAV, dynamic amplification is possible, wherein the vertical acceleration at the isolators is amplified compared to PGAV. Phase-lag effects may also occur, such that the peak lateral base shear Vb,2D and peak vertical base shear Vb,V do not occur at the same time. Thus, ν = 1 could be justified if the dynamic amplification and phase-lag effects approximately cancel each other out. If there is no dynamic amplification and phase-lag effects are apparent, assuming a value less than 1 for ν may be appropriate. If considerable dynamic amplification is observed, and peak horizontal and vertical responses are in phase, then a value for ν considerably larger than 1 may best represent the response characteristics.
Going forward, three different values for ν represent the three conditions described above: ν = 0.5, ν = 1, and ν = Sa(Tv)/PGAV, where Sa(Tv) = spectral acceleration of the vertical ground motion at the dominant vertical period Tv of the isolated structure. The final value is predicated on the assumption that if dynamic amplification is present, the realized vertical acceleration at the isolators can be estimated from the spectral amplification of the ground motion based on the dominant vertical mode. The period Tv should be chosen independently for every bridge. For the Base Model bridge configuration, Tv = 0.2 sec is selected because it approximately corresponds to Mode 7, the dominant vertical mode observed in the response; see Figure 4.21.


