Seismic isolation is a very effective approach to reduce the damaging effects of earthquakes on bridges, buildings, and other structural or nonstructural components. Isolation devices physically detach and uncouple the structure from the ground motion, thus reducing the forces transmitted to the structure by an earthquake. When applied to a bridge, the devices isolate the superstructure from horizontal ground shaking, significantly reducing the demand on the substructure. In order to isolate the superstructure, flexible devices are installed between the superstructure and substructure. Figure 1.1 compares a conventional bridge and isolated bridge response under earthquake loading.
An isolation system lengthens the natural period of the structure, significantly reducing the spectral acceleration demands (Figure 1.2). This reduction of spectral acceleration reduces inertial forces on the superstructure and allows the substructure––typically multi-column bents––to be designed to remain elastic. The lengthened natural period of the structure increases the displacement demands, which are accommodated by isolation devices. As a consequence, wider expansion joints and increased seat length may be required to accommodate displacement demands. 
Isolation devices incorporate energy-dissipation mechanisms designed to limit the displacements demands to a reasonable level. Figure 1.3 shows a bilinear force-displacement curve, which is generally representative of several types of energy-dissipating isolation devices. The area under the closed curve represents the energy dissipated during each cycle of motion of the isolators. Isolation devices are also designed to provide high initial stiffness to resist service loads, e.g., wind loads or vehicle breaking forces. Isolation bearings remain elastic under wind loads and vehicle breaking forces, and exhibit nonlinear response under earthquake forces.

Primarily, there are two classes of bearings commonly used as isolation devices: lead–rubber bearings (LRBs) and spherical sliding bearings. Lead–rubber bearings incorporate alternating layers of rubber with steel shims; the rubber layers provide flexibility and the steel shims prevent bulging under vertical loads. The LRB also uses a lead core press fit into the center as part of the energy-dissipation mechanism. Large diameter LRBs are required to maintain stability under large lateral displacements and high axial loads; however, increasing the diameter increases the bearing stiffness, which may undermine the seismic isolation objective. In the design of LRBs, balancing the competing needs to achieve both stability and the required bearing flexibility can be difficult.
Spherical sliding bearings use a frictional slider on a spherical surface. The natural period of a structure isolated with spherical sliding bearings is independent of the weight and determined only by the radius or radii of curvature of the spherical surface(s). Various types of spherical sliding bearings are manufactured by Earthquake Protection Systems and are classified as Friction PendulumTM bearings (FPB). Figure 1.4 shows two types of FPBs: single pendulum bearings (SPBs) [Figure 1.4(a)], and triple pendulum bearings (TPBs) [Figure 1.4(b)]. Single pendulum bearings consist of a single slider that slides over a spherical surface, resulting in a single pendulum mechanism. A TPB embeds an inner double pendulum mechanism (articulated slider sandwiched between spherical sliding surfaces on the top and bottom) within an outer double pendulum mechanism. Hence, there are four spherical surfaces on which sliding occurs. Note that although the two inner sliding surfaces are identical, the two outer surfaces may have distinct radii of curvature, which in the most general case results in three pendulum mechanisms. Multi-spherical sliding bearings such as the TPB can provide displacement capacity comparable to an SPB with a reduced bearing diameter.

Figure 1.5 is an idealized schematic of the equilibrium of the SPB in the displaced configuration. From Figure 1.5, the force-deformation relationship of the bearing is derived as:

where R is the radius of curvature, µ the friction coefficient, and u the lateral displacement. Although the term W generally symbolizes weight, it should be interpreted as the instantaneous axial force on the bearing. Thus, the horizontal force of the isolator depends on instantaneous axial force acting on it, implying that vertical motion might affect the horizontal response of the structure significantly.
The significant influence of vertical shaking was observed in a full-scale test of a five-story steel moment frame building (Figure 1.6) isolated by TPBs at Japan’s E-Defense facility in August 2011 [Dao and Ryan 2015]. The anticipated outcome of the full-scale test was to prove the effectiveness of the isolation system to protect both the structure and nonstructural components. Based on the test results, however, nonstructural components were shown to be vulnerable to the vertical component of shaking [Ryan and Dao 2015; Soroushian et al. 2015], and horizontal-vertical coupling effects were also noted in the response [Ryan and Dao 2015]. The test program included 19 independent test simulations—or trials—each with a different input motion. Input ground motions incorporated a sine wave, a variety of recorded ground motions, and one simulated motion. The ground motions included representative broadband frequency shaking, shaking in the near-fault region, and shaking from a long-duration subduction motion. Some input motions were applied with vertical shaking and some were applied without, although few direct comparisons (same motion with and without vertical shaking) were applied.

The results of the test program demonstrated two direct effects of vertical shaking that may need to be considered in the lateral design of isolated structures. The effects are believed to be generally applicable to structures with spherical sliding bearings and even flat sliding bearings. The first effect was an increase in base shear, which occurs because the bearing horizontal force is proportional to the instantaneous axial force or normal force on the bearing. 
To demonstrate, Figure 1.7 compares the recorded histories of base shear in X and Y, and total axial force of the building under the 1999 ChiChi, Taiwan, earthquake recorded at TCU station [TCU80(XY)] and the 1978 Tabas, Iran, earthquake recorded at Tabas station (TAB80). TCU80(XY) and TAB 80 are representative of two-dimensional (2D) (without vertical) and three-dimensional (3D) (with vertical) motions, respectively, that were applied during the test program. The number 80 indicates both records were scaled to 80% of their recorded intensity. The axial force is almost constant under the 2D motion TCU80(XY), and the shear force is dominated by longer period cycles; however, under the 3D motion TAB80, the axial force history contains high-frequency variation due to the vertical shaking. This high-frequency content was also transferred to the bearing lateral force. As a result, the base-shear history contains high-frequency content at peak locations.
Figure 1.8 compares the recorded base shear for both 2D and 3D shaking under 88% of the motion recorded at Rinaldi Receiving Station (RRS) in the 1994 Northridge, California, earthquake. This was the only direct comparison with the same motion applied both with and without the vertical component of shaking. The intensity of the vertical component was greater than 1g [vertical peak ground acceleration (PGA) or PGAV = 1.2g]. This caused a complete uplift excursion of the bearings. Although the total axial force dropped to zero, the system recovered; see Figure 1.8(c). The high-frequency component of the base shear for 3D shaking (with a period around 0.16 sec), which is absent in 2D shaking, was in sync with the total axial force variation for 3D shaking; see Figure 1.8.
The second observed effect was an amplification of horizontal floor accelerations due to the expression of higher modes activated by horizontal–vertical coupling. Specifically, the high-frequency component introduced into the base shear by the vertical motion caused the activation of higher structural modes. Figure 1.9 shows floor spectra for the 3D recorded motion from 1995 Kobe, Japan, earthquake at Takatori Station, generated from both test data and numerical simulation using the validated computational model. These spectra provide evidence of a response in Mode 8 (the second structural mode) and determined to have a period of 0.17 sec based on modal analysis. In the Mode 8 displaced shape, floors 2 and 5 are nearly stationary; see Figure 1.9. The floor acceleration response spectra at Floors 1, 3, 4, and 6 show spectral peaks around 0.17 sec (the period of Mode 8), whereas Floors 2 and 5 (the nodal locations in Mode 8) are not amplified. Thus, Mode 8 was amplified in the presence of vertical shaking because its period was closely tuned to the period of vertical shaking. In bridges isolated with spherical sliding bearings, a similar amplification of higher mode(s) due to vertical shaking is possible.
In summary, the effect of vertical motion on structures isolated with spherical sliding bearings, especially for isolated bridges, is a relatively unexplored topic, and past research has been very limited. The next section documents previous studies on the effect of vertical shaking on isolated structures, with an emphasis on those with spherical sliding bearings.
