As outlined above, although quite a few previous experimental studies reported no significant influence of vertical motion on the horizontal response isolated structures, the experimental test on a full-scale five-story steel moment frame building isolated with TPBs at E-defense demonstrated that vertical shaking can increase the base shear and horizontal acceleration. This observation is supported by a number of analytical studies that predict that horizontal responses can be increased by 3D excitation. These effects are anticipated to have direct significance to bridges, wherein the amplified horizontal force of the TPBs will lead to increased base-shear demand on bridge piers. Furthermore, potential coupling between vertical and horizontal vibration modes might occur, which can increase horizontal acceleration and associated spectra due to the activation of a higher structural mode. Design methods or simplified methods that can account for amplification of seismic responses due to vertical shaking are needed. Bridges are conceptually simpler dynamically; therefore, they should be the natural starting point for a comprehensive treatment of the subject.
The primary objectives of this study are as follows: (1) to develop a physical understanding of the phenomena by which responses in bridges isolated with spherical sliding bearings are amplified due to vertical shaking; and (2) to develop a simplified method to estimate the amplification of the base-shear coefficient for this class of bridges. 
This report is organized as follows: Chapter 1 documents the motivation and background of this study with a review of relevant literature. For this study, a ground-motion suite was selected that has a wide range of horizontal and vertical intensity ground-motion components. The detailed procedure for selection and scaling of the ground motions is presented in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 identifies the prominent bridge type used in California suitable for seismic isolation; describes the geometry, properties and modeling assumptions of a Base Model bridge, and identifies parameter variations to be applied to the bridge and the isolation system. Chapter 4 discusses fundamental dynamic properties of the Base Model bridge, and presents histories of various responses under representative ground motions, amplification of responses based on vertical PGA, and spectral responses to identify coupling between horizontal and vertical modes. Chapter 5 describes the proposed simplified method for estimating base-shear amplification and error analysis to validate the method. Chapter 6 validates the method considering various isolation-system parameters and bridge-parameter variations. Key conclusions from this study are presented in Chapter 7.
