The horizontal component of the acceleration on the mass blocks was significantly lower than that recorded at the top of the column. This is a result of the rigid body rotation of the mass blocks due to the rotation at the top of the column. Reduction of the horizontal acceleration increased the bending moment at the top of the column relative to the bending moment at the base.
The shaking table flexibility had a pronounced effect on the vertical response. The dynamic mode, which was introduced by the shaking table stiffness (in the vertical direction) and its mass, governed the response in the vertical direction. Therefore, the response due to the column’s axial mode was reduced compared to the case of a rigid shaking table. However, it should be notes that the flexibility of the shaking table did not affect the current investigation because the mode introduced by the shaking table flexibility had a significantly larger period compared to the column’s vertical period. As a matter of fact, the effect of the shaking table flexibility is analogous to the effect of bridge girders in elongating the period of the bridge system compared to the period of a single bridge column.
Considerable tensile force was induced on the test column due to vertical excitation.
Tension in the columns resulted in degradation of shear strength, which was mainly due to the degradation of the concrete contribution to shear strength.
Reduction in the concrete strength was also evidenced by the comparison of shear cracks in the 125%-scale horizontal only and horizontal and vertical tests.
Flexural damage at the top of the column took place before the flexural damage at the base since the bending moment at the top was larger. This is a result of the large mass moment of inertia at the top of the column. Reduction of the acceleration on the mass block due to the rotations contributed to this situation as well.
Flexural damage occurred and propagated both at the top and base of the column as the scale of the ground motion increased.
As a result of flexural yielding both at the top and base of the column bending in double curvature, shear force reached shear capacity, which would not have occurred if yielding had happened at the base and the bending moment at the top was smaller than the yielding bending moment. Shear cracks occurred as a result.
Tensile force due to vertical excitation reduced the shear strength and increased shear cracks.
Developed computational models were successful in capturing the shear force and displacement histories measured during the tests. They captured accurately the rotational mode effect on the bending moment at the column top.
Investigated computational models, namely “Beam with Hinges” (Model A) and “Nonlinear Beam-Column” (Model B) provided similar results.
The dominance of the shaking table flexibility on the vertical response was demonstrated by an elastic dynamic analysis of a two-degrees-of-freedom system that modeled the column and the shaking table together as a structural system.
Due to the difficulty in modeling the shaking table stiffness, which varies during a test as well as between different intensity tests, measured axial force was directly applied to the computational models. This approach addressed the main purpose of this investigation to evaluate axial tension on the shear capacity and the development of a corresponding computational modeling approach.
Accurate representation of the vertical displacement response required a more detailed finite element model so that cracking could be modeled. However, because vertical displacement produced by the axial force was the end result of this investigation, which does not change the interaction of axial and shear response; such a detailed finite element model was not considered.
Both the ACI-218-11 and SDC equations captured the shear strength degradation due to axial force. Both of the equations provided results on the conservative side; the ACI equation predictions could be considered as accurate and SDC equation predictions as highly conservative. (Elimination of the concrete contribution to shear strength under tension was the primary reason for the highly conservative predictions of SDC equation). Strength reduction caused by ductility was not as significant as that by tension. 
The developed shear springs element implemented in OpenSees fulfilled the objectives of the computational modeling for simulating the effect of the axial force on the shear strength.
