This chapter presents the analyses conducted prior to the planned shaking table tests on the PEER earthquake simulator of University of California, Berkeley (UCB). Results of these analyses were utilized as a guidance to select the ground motions, column geometry, and reinforcement, and the set-up of the shaking table tests. First, the method used for selecting a smaller number of critical ground motions from a larger set is presented. Subsequently, the possible representative bridge prototypes are described. Finally, a parametric study conducted for a single column based on one of the prototypes is described, and the results of this parametric study are presented.
The PEER NGA database [2013] provides 3551 earthquake acceleration records and their meta-data. Among them, 3466 ground motions, with all three components available, were selected from the database. Three criteria were utilized to select the ground motions from these 3466 recorded motions to be used in the parametric study. According to the first criterion, ground motions with a PGA of one or two horizontal components less than 0.25g were eliminated, reducing the possible ground motion set to only 293 ground motions. The second criterion was based on the ratio of the pseudo-spectral acceleration corresponding to the vertical component (PSav) to those corresponding to the horizontal components (PSah1, PSah2). For each of the 293 ground motions, pseudo-spectral accelerations of the vertical component were calculated corresponding to the vertical periods (Tv) of 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, and 0.2 sec; pseudo-spectral accelerations of the horizontal components were calculated corresponding to the horizontal periods (Th) of 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, and 0.8 sec. The chosen Tv and Th values resulted in 20 Tv, Th pairs. Since each ground motion has two horizontal components, there are two spectral ratios for each pair: namely, PSav/PSah1 and PSav/PSah2. Figures 2.1 and 2.2 present the relationships of the ratios PSav/PSah1 versus the ratios PGAv/PGAh1, PGAh1, and PGAv for Th=0.4 sec and Th=0.7 sec, respectively, for different values of Tv. The following observations were deducted from Figures 2.1 and 2.2.
If PSav/PSah1 or PSav/PSah2 is larger than 1.0 in at least 15 pairs among the 20 pairs defined above, it is selected as one of the ground motions to be applied in the parametric study. The number of the considered ground motions is reduced from 293 to 80, according to this second criterion.
Arrival time is utilized as the third criterion. As discussed in Collier and Elnashai [2001], and Kim and Elnashai [2008], because the interval between the horizontal and the vertical peak accelerations affects the interaction of the horizontal and the vertical responses, it can be considered as an indicator. Among the 80 chosen ground motions after application of the second criterion, there were some motions that have significant arrival time intervals. Anza-02 earthquake recorded at Idyllwild-Kenworthy Fire Station (record sequence number (RSN) 1944 in PEER NGA database [2013] is shown in Figure 2.3 as an example). The interval between the peaks is longer than 3 sec, i.e., 3.160 sec for H1 versus V and 3.345 sec for H2 versus V. In this case, the PGA of the vertical component took place more than 3 sec before the horizontal components reached their PGA values. With this perspective, 14 additional ground motions were eliminated from the 80 ground motions. In addition, four ground motions were removed since they had only low-frequency content. One ground motion was removed because it was almost identical to another ground motion. Finally, based on the above three criteria and after removing the ground motions with only low-frequency content, 61 ground motions were selected from the existing 3551 ground motions in PEER NGA database [2013], which are listed in Appendix A.
Selection of ground motions based on the ratio PSav/PSah being greater than 1.0 discussed above might lead to the exclusion of some important ground motions in the cases where PSah is large and PSav is large enough to produce a significant difference between the two cases with and without vertical excitation (even if PSav/PSah is not larger than 1.0). This issue is discussed further at the end of the chapter.
Kunnath et al. [2008] considered two types of bridges: a single bent, two-span overpass and a single-column bent, multi-span bridge. For the overpass system, a segment of El Camino Del Norte Bridge was selected as the prototype bridge, whereas the Amador Creek Bridge (ACB) was used as the prototype bridge for the multi-span system. The selected overpass represents short-span RC bridges, whereas the multi-span system represents long-span PC bridges.
According to the analyses in Kunnath et al. [2008], the effect of the vertical acceleration was more significant in El Camino Del Norte Bridge, which has a multi-column bridge bent. However, even though the effect of axial force might be more significant in multi-column bridge bents, it is not practical to represent this effect in shaking table testing. Moreover, the complexity of the behavior of multi-column bridge bents due to other factors beyond the effect of vertical acceleration makes shaking table testing of single-column bridge bents for understanding the effect of vertical acceleration more realistic. Hence, the columns of single-column bridge bents are investigated herein. Note that only ACB was used as the prototype for the parametric study in Section 2.3.
Amador Creek Bridge is a 685 ft (207.6 m) long, three-bent, four-span RC bridge. The spans are 133.0 ft (40.5 m), 177.1 ft (53.7 m), 177.1 ft (53.7 m), and 133.0 ft (40.5 m). The bents of the bridge consist of single double-spiral columns. Figure 2.4 shows the elevation view and cross-sectional details of the columns. The column heights are 64.8 ft (19.75 m), 91.9 ft (28.0 m), and 83.7 ft (25.25 m). Based on the height of the third bent, H3 in Figure 2.5(a), the column ARs (ratio of height to cross-section dimension in the loading direction) considering the weak (X) and strong (Y) axes are 13.95 and 9.30, respectively.
The bridge was assumed to have an elastic superstructure based on the SDC capacity design approach [Caltrans 2013] and modeled as an elastic superstructure supported on nonlinear columns founded on elastic foundation using OpenSees [2000]. The superstructure cross-section properties of the ACB are presented in Table 2.1, where area is , moment of inertia is, , and the polar moment of inertia is .
The compressive strength of unconfined concrete and the yield strength of longitudinal reinforcement are specified to be 4 ksi (27.6 MPa) and 60 ksi (413.7 MPa), respectively, as designated on the design drawings. The compressive strength and ultimate strain of confined concrete were computed to be 5.83 kips (25.9 kN) and 0.0157 using per Mander [Mander et al. 1988]. Concrete01 material in OpenSees was used for both the confined and unconfined concrete. A bilinear model with a post-yield stiffness of 1% of the initial stiffness was used to model the reinforcing steel. Because the bridge columns rest on shallow foundations, six elastic springs in three translational and three rotational directions were used to model the soil-foundation system for each column. The approximate expressions in FEMA-356 [FEMA 2000] were used to compute the properties of the corresponding springs. Table 2.2 lists the values of the spring stiffness representing the foundation system resting on a soil with a shear wave velocity of 1181 ft/sec (360.0 m/sec).
Seat-type abutments are used at both ends of the bridge. Spring systems were used to model the stiffness of the abutments. In the transverse direction, shear keys are designed to break off during a strong ground motion. Hence, the seat-type abutments do not possess stiffness in the transverse direction. In the vertical direction, the movement of the bridge is prevented at the abutments in both upward and downward directions. Thus, the abutments were modeled as restraining supports in the vertical direction. In the longitudinal direction, the bridge is free to move in the opposite direction of the abutment at each end. Towards the abutment, there is a certain amount of gap before the deck makes contact with the abutment. When the deck and the abutment are in contact, the stiffness of the abutment was computed as  [Caltrans 2013], where  is the initial stiffness of the abutment and is taken as 20.0 k/in. per ft of abutment width (11.49 kN/mm per m), and  and  are the projected width and height (in feet) of the abutment taken as 22.8 ft and 82.0 ft, respectively. Accordingly, a spring that has no stiffness in tension and elastic in compression with spring stiffness of 6785 kip/ft (99,019.6 kN/m) and with a 4-in. (101.6-mm) gap was used to model the abutment behavior in the longitudinal direction.
In single-column bridge bents, the superstructure is expected to be more vulnerable to torsional effects [rotation about X-axis defined in Figure 2.5(a)] than multi-column bridge bents. To ensure the proper modeling of the torsional properties of the deck, a 3D shell model of the bridge was created in SAP2000 [Computers and Engineering, Inc. 2006]; see Figure 2.5(b). The inertia properties of the OpenSees model, see Table 2.1, were adjusted later to match the periods of vibration of the SAP2000 model.
As mentioned previously, the objective of the parametric study is to provide guidance about the ground motion, column geometry and reinforcement, and set-up of the shaking table tests. Since the objective of the tests is to observe the effect of vertical excitation, a symmetric circular cross section is more suitable than an asymmetric interlocking spiral cross section. In this way, an unnecessary complication affecting the result—the effect of the difference of the cross-section moment of inertia and capacity in the two main orthogonal directions—is avoided. In addition, a circular section is more suitable from a practical point of view for test specimen detailing and construction. Due to the shaking table limitations, the test specimen should at most be a 1/4-scale of the prototype dimensions. Under these conditions, the interlocking spiral reinforcement should be installed in a small cross section with unknown influence of this reduced scale on the role of the interlocking spiral. Considering these reasons, the interlocking spiral section, which has different properties in each direction, was replaced by an effective circular cross section.
To determine the size and number of longitudinal reinforcing bars and size (i.e., radius) of the effective circular column, flexural and axial capacities were considered. Since the original (interlocking spiral) cross section had different moment capacities in each direction, the weak axis properties were chosen as the properties to be matched. Resulting area and moment of inertia values for the effective cross section in comparison with the original interlocking spiral cross-section are listed in Table 2.3. The spacing and diameter of the spiral reinforcement used in the interlocking spiral column were directly employed for the effective circular cross section. 
A series of elastic modal analyses were carried out on both systems (with interlocking spiral and with effective circular cross sections) to calibrate the inertial properties of the superstructure of the OpenSees model. Figure 2.6 presents the fundamental elastic mode shapes in longitudinal, transverse, vertical, and torsional directions, along with the corresponding periods for OpenSees models. Also, Table 2.4 clearly shows that the line model created in OpenSees is capable of reasonably capturing the eigenvalues of the ACB in all directions compared to the more detailed finite element shell model developed in SAP2000.
Figure 2.7 compares responses at the second column of the ACB [Column H2 in Figure 2.5(a)] with the interlocking cross section and the corresponding effective circular cross section as described above. These results are provided for the bridge response under the three components of the ground motion #40 in Appendix A (RSN 1063 in PEER NGA database [2013], Rinaldi receiving station, Northridge earthquake).
Figure 2.7(a), (b), and (c) compares moment at the base, , base shear force, , and axial force, , respectively, for column H2 [Figure 2.5 (a)] of the ACB using the OpenSees line model shown in Figure 2.5(a). Although the interlocking spiral and the circular cross sections do not have the same response, the discrepancy is less than 20% when considering the maximum values. Therefore, using the effective circular cross section instead of the interlocking spiral cross section is an efficient option, thereby reducing the complexity of this study and the planned shaking table experiments.
The Plumas-Arboga Overhead Bridge (PAOB) is a 456 ft (139 m) long, two-bent, three-span RC bridge. Like the ACB, it was designed by Caltrans according to post-Northridge design practice. The spans connected to abutments are about 133 ft (40.5 m) each and the span between columns is about 190 ft (58.0 m). The heights of the two bents shown in Figure 2.8(a) were modeled as 29.7 ft (9.0 m). The AR along the ‘Bent center line’ (weak axis) is 3.58 and that along the ‘Bridge center line’ (strong axis) is 5.37. Table 2.5 presents area and moment of inertia properties of the elastic superstructure of the PAOB. Table 2.6 lists properties of its original interlocking spiral column cross section and the modified effective circular cross section. This latter cross section was used to design the shaking table test specimens. Column properties related to mass and mass moment of inertia are discussed in Chapter 3, since its AR is closer to the desired value than that of ACB.
Using a single column model with effective circular cross-section from the ACB, the following parametric study is conducted. Considered parameters were ground motions, number of components of ground motions, ARs, and existence of mass moment of inertia. The chosen values of these parameters are described in the following next.
As stated in Section 2.1, 61 ground motions are selected in this study from the PEER NGA database [2013]. To confirm the effectiveness of the selected ground motions, 293 ground motions with PGA larger than 0.25g were applied in this parametric study and the results were compared.
To study the effect of vertical motions, the responses with and without vertical ground motion were compared. In this comparison, three cases were utilized:
X, Y, and Z components versus X and Y components (effect of vertical excitation when both horizontal components are present)
X and Z components versus X component (effect of vertical excitation when one of the horizontal components only is present)
Y and Z components versus Y component (effect of vertical excitation when the other horizontal component is present only)
To represent a bridge system that is idealized with free rotation at the connection between the column and the bridge deck, a model with no mass moment of inertia on top of the column was adopted. However, mass moment of inertia can be added on top of the column corresponding to the more realistic connection in the bridge system. Note that the value of the mass moment of inertia was calibrated to obtain the same periods, mainly the period in the bridge transverse direction, , for both the bridge system (with the bridge deck modeled) and the single column cases.
As the AR, i.e., height to diameter ratio, of a column, i.e., , increases, the column becomes less likely to experience shear failure. To study this important parameter, six ARs of values 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, 5.0, were considered. Note that  is taken as the height of the column itself, which does not include the rigid end zone lengths due to the physical size of the added mass on top of the column, as discussed below, or due to the footing size.
To represent the full-scale single column, the following models were used: Type 1 and Type 2 represented the cases without and with mass moment of inertia, respectively (Figure 2.9). For both models, the suggested equivalent circular cross section was considered, and the column was modeled using the ‘beam with hinges’ (BWH) element in OpenSees. For Type 1, mass blocks were installed below the column top to lower the center-of-mass to the pin location. Since the system can become unstable during shaking, a catching system needed to be used for safety purposes, but it is not included in the analytical model. For Type 2, regular mass blocks were employed, as shown in Figure 2.9. In addition, a third model, designated as Type 2-1, was used, which was derived from Type 2 model by employing the mass blocks of the Type 1 model to lower the center-of-mass. Line representations of the three types are presented in Figure 2.10.
Mass was determined from the gravity load of the full-scale prototype bridge system, and mass moment of inertia was determined to match the periods of the bridge system.. However, it was not possible to match the vertical period of the single column to that of the bridge system, mainly because of the lack of the additional flexibility introduced by the bridge deck in the single-column model. Instead, the vertical response of the single column model was matched to that of the corresponding column, which is a part of the whole bridge system model. The horizontal and vertical periods of the models Types 1 and 2 are shown in Table 2.7. The periods of Type 2 are larger than those of Type 1, which is due to the added mass moment of inertia and the difference in height. The differences between the periods of models Type 2-1 and Type 1 are smaller than the differences between the periods of models Type 2 and Type 1 since models Type 1 and Type 2-1 have the same heights, as shown in Figure 2.10.
Table 2.8 presents the vertical periods of the bridge system, which can be compared to those of Type 2 or Type 2-1 single column model listed in Table 2.7. Vertical periods of the bridge system can be as high as 8.5 times of those of the single column model. The difference is basically due to the effect of the flexibility of the deck in the bridge system, which, as noted above, was not considered in the single column model. Note that the vertical periods do not significantly change due to the properties of the springs at the column base that represent the flexible foundation. Since the vertical response is expected to have an influence on the shear strength and is closely related to the vertical period, these differences cannot be neglected.
Ideally, the response of the single column model should be identical to that of the bridge system, but for practical purposes, differences within ±20% are considered to be acceptable. Figure 2.11 presents the bending moment and axial force of the single column model, specifically Type 2 with AR = 4.0, and those of the corresponding system model using all three components of ground motions #60 (Whittier Narrows earthquake record at LA Obregon Park) and #7 (Northridge earthquake record at Rinaldi Receiving Station) (see Appendix A for further details about these records). In case of ground motion #60, the bending moment history was similar in the two models, and the amplitude of axial force was also similar, even though the frequency was quite different from each other; this is because the vertical period of the bridge system is longer than that of the single column. However, ground motion #7 produced very different results. Although the bending moment history is similar in the two models for ground motion #7 as in the case of ground motion #60, the amplitude of the axial force of the bridge system was less than 40% of that of the single column. Therefore, in this case the axial response of the single column will not represent the real axial response of the bridge system in shaking table tests. Since the axial force and accordingly the axial strain are considered the main parameters in estimating the shear strength (refer to Section 1.2), underestimation of the shear strength and, as a result, overestimation of the effect of the vertical component of the ground motion may occur.
Due to the limitations of the shaking table, it was not possible to construct the complete bridge system. Even though the discrepancy was related to the properties of ground motion, modifying input excitations may not be an effective way to resolve this discrepancy within the limits of the shaking table. In that regard, the experimental effort on a single column model, even taking into account his discrepancy in comparison with the bridge system model, can be viewed as a means to generate benchmark experimental data sets for developing and calibrating accurate analytical shear strength models for further use in computational modeling of the full bridge system. Finally, it is expected that the effect of the vertical excitation on the seismic response of the bridge system can be computationally assessed using these accurate analytical shear strength models of the RC bridge columns.
Given there were three cases of ground motion components (Section 2.3.1.2), 2 models (Types 1 and 2 only) and six aspect ratios, a total of 36 cases were analyzed. For each case, 61 ground motions were applied, and maximum values of translational displacements at the top of the column, and maximum forces and bending moments at the bottom of the column were calculated. The difference ratio due to the vertical component (VDR) was computed using Equation (2.1).
The ratios using the X+Y+Z and X+Y (effect of vertical excitation when both horizontal components are present) that were applied to Type 2 model are shown in Figure 2.12. Values on the horizontal axis are the ground motion numbers, and those on the vertical axis are the difference ratios (VDR), as defined in Equation (2.1). Although the ratios are not narrowly-distributed, most of them are concentrated near zero and mostly located in the range of -0.1 to 0.1, except for the case of the maximum displacement in the Z-direction, , and the maximum force in the Z-direction, ; the VDRs for  and  are all positive. Note that the ground motion numbers on the horizontal axis in Figure 2.12 are sorted in a descending order of the peak vertical acceleration (PGAv). Therefore, it can be concluded that the motions with relatively larger vertical acceleration result in larger VDRs in most responses.
The average values of the absolute VDRs for a constant AR are shown in Figure 2.13. The values on the horizontal axis are ARs, and those on the vertical axis are absolute VDRs. Since X+Z versus X and Y+Z versus Y do not have significant responses in the Y-direction and X-direction, respectively, the values corresponding to these cases are not presented in the corresponding figures.
Except the maximum displacement and force in the Z-direction,  and , respectively, the effect of the vertical ground motion is not significant. The averages for the maximum displacement in the X-direction, , are less than 1.5% for all cases, and those for the maximum displacement in the Y-direction, , are less than 1.4%. In case of forces in the X- and Y-directions,  and , respectively, average values are less than 3%, and they are less than 2.5% for moments about the X- and Y-directions, Mx and My, respectively. However, the average values for  are between 28% and 75%, and those for  are between 50% and 85%. As the AR becomes larger, the different ratios tend to increase. This means that in general the effect of vertical motion becomes more significant as the column becomes taller.
As shown in Figures 2.12 and 2.13, the change in the response quantities other than the axial force and axial displacement is not important. Accordingly, it can be stated that the shear demand change due to the vertical ground motion is a minor importance compared to the change in shear capacity. However, the change in the axial force due to vertical ground motion is noteworthy, resulting in a decrease of the shear strength when axial tensile forces occur. Since Figures 2.12 and 2.13 plot the maximum responses, the effect of the occurrence of the axial tensile forces or the decrease in the axial compressive forces is not explicitly identifiable from these figures. However, the drastic change in the axial forces due to the vertical excitation can be clearly observed. The effect of axial force in the reduction of shear force capacity is examined in more details in the following section. The difference due to the number of applied horizontal components is not significant on the effect of the vertical excitation on the axial force. In Figure 2.13(f), note that the difference between the average VDR in the presence of two and one horizontal component is less than 10%.
The difference ratio due to the employed model (Type 1 versus Type 2) was calculated using Equation (2.2), which defines the type difference ratio. The results using this ratio are presented in Figures 2.14 and 2.15.
Figure 2.14 presents the TDR values under the presence of all three components of ground motion. As before, the ground motions were sorted in a descending order of the peak vertical acceleration (PVA). The motions with large PVA tend to have smaller TDR values, except for  and . The ratios are more widely distributed than the VDR values obtained by Equation (2.1), mainly due to the different dynamic properties of the two types and the presence of the top moment in Type 2 model Most of these values were in the range of -1.0 to 1.0. However, having observed that the axial force is one of the response parameters that is affected by the vertical ground motion (see Figures 2.12 and 2.13), it can be concluded that the effect of the model type for axial force is not important considering that the TDR values are within the range -0.2 and 0.2, and mainly concentrated around zero. This same observation can be deduced from Figure 2.15, which presents the average for the absolute values of the TDR for different ARs with and without vertical excitation cases. Here, the average absolute values for the axial force are mostly below 10% and between 15% and 38% for the other response parameters. For all the response parameters, the TDRs tend to be larger as the AR becomes smaller.
Figure 2.16 compares the average absolute TDR values for different response parameters Type 1 and Type 2-1 models, i.e., the average of the absolute TDRs between Type 1 and Type 2-1, instead of Type 1 and Type 2 as shown in Figure 2.15. The mean of TDR between Type 1 and Type 2-1 decreased compared to that between Type 1 and Type 2. This can be explained by the reduced discrepancy of periods, which are shown in Table 2.7. This is especially true for the average values of TDR for , , , and , which decreased significantly when compared to the results in Figure 2.16, i.e., the average absolute TDR values for different response parameters comparing Type 1 and Type 2-1 models to those in Figure 2.15.
In addition, the average absolute values of TDR for  and  have different patterns. Comparing Figure 2.15(c) to Figure 2.16(c) and Figure 2.15(f) to Figure 2.16(f), the values under the presence of vertical excitation (designated as ‘With Z’) decreased noticeably when Type 2-1 was used instead of Type 2; this is because Type 1 and Type 2-1 have smaller differences in  and the same . When vertical excitation is applied, the vertical responses are more dependent more on the vertical periods compared to the horizontal periods. Hence, compared to Type 2, Type 2-1 is closer to Type 1 in terms of the responses  and .
The results discussed above can be summarized as follows:
The presence of one or both of the horizontal components does not produce significant differences.
Except for the axial displacement and force ( and ), the difference in other response quantities due to vertical excitation is not significant, less than 5%, in general.
For both models Types 1 and 2, the effect of vertical excitation is significant in , with the potential to affect their shear strength.
The difference in  or  in Type 1 and Type 2 is relatively small. For other response parameters, the difference between Type 1 and Type 2 cannot be ignored, and becomes larger as the AR of column becomes smaller. However, since the axial force is the only important parameter that is significantly affected by vertical excitation, it can be concluded that the differences between models Types 1 and 2 are not important for the purposes of this study. These differences are even less important between Types 1 and 2-1.
Section 2.4 discussed the change of demand due to vertical excitation using three different modeling types, several ARs, and various ground motions. It was determined that axial force is the only force parameter affected by the presence of vertical excitation. In this section, the effect of axial force on the shear strength is investigated in detail, using the different shear strength equations presented in Chapter 1. In addition, the shear demand is compared with the shear capacity.
Figure 2.17 compares the shear strength calculated using equations given in ACI-318-11 (Section 1.2.1), CSA (Section 1.2.4), Eurocode (Section 1.2.5) and Caltrans SDC (Section 1.2.7) and the shear demand using ground motion #9 (Landers earthquake recorded at Lucerne station) (see Appendix A for further details) with one of the horizontal components and with and without the vertical component (designated as ‘xz’ and ‘x’, respectively); Figure 2.17(c) and (d) are for model Type 2. Note that ACI, CSA, Eurocode, and SDC documents are not consistent results in estimating the shear strength. Before the ground motion is applied (i.e., under the presence of only gravity loading), ACI offers the most conservative estimation, but once the dynamic excitation is included, the estimates change significantly for all methods. In general, CSA’s prediction changes during dynamic excitation more dramatically than the ACI, Eurocode, or SDC documents. Another observation from Figure 2.17 is that the possibility of shear failure increases when vertical excitation is present. For example, including the Z-component produces a shear strength that is much closer to the shear demand compared to the shear strength without the Z-component. Worth noting is that the SDC has a minimum value of 5681.9 kips whenever tensile axial force is applied, as shown in Figure 2.17(b) and (d).
The maximum ratio of the shear demand and shear strength, Maxdcr, and the reduction of the shear strength due to the earthquake excitation, Red, are calculated using Equation (2.3) and Equation (2.4), respectively. Maxdcr and Red using ACI are shown in Figure 2.18. All ARs are considered for all the 61 ground motions. Only the results of the case ‘X+Y+Z and X+Y’ (the effect of vertical excitation when both horizontal components are present) applied to Type 2 are shown. Almost all of the Maxdcr values are between 0.1 and 0.6; as expected, small ARs have large values of Maxdcr. Although Maxdcr values do not significantly change by adding the vertical earthquake component, there are differences in some of the ground motions. For example, Maxdcr for AR = 2.5 increases from 0.564 to 0.617 under ground motion #3 (see Appendix A). As expected, the Red values change significantly with relatively large vertical acceleration (ground motion (GM) #1 to approximately #20),. In general, Maxdcr values decrease as the number of the ground motion increases. Note that, as before, the ground motion numbers on the horizontal axis of Figure 2.18 are sorted in a descending order of the peak vertical acceleration (PGAv).
The ACI and SDC documents provide similar Maxdcr and Red values with relatively small vertical acceleration (GM#20 or above). However, with the ground motions below #20, there is a greater disparity between Maxdcr and Red of SDC and those of ACI. Figure 2.19(a) and (b) shows the Maxdcr values based on SDC without and with the Z-component, respectively. Both cases have the values between 0.1 and 1.0 with the ground motions below #20, but it is noticeable that more points are between 0.6 and 1.0 in Figure 2.19(b) than those in Figure 2.19(a). Figure 2.19(c) and (d) shown Red values based on SDC without and with Z-component, respectively. There are four ground motions that have significant reduction caused by lateral displacement ductility even without Z-component. Worth noting is that there are more than 20 ground motions causing the same Red around 0.53 with the Z-component included. Since the shear strength contribution of concrete, Vc, from SDC is zero under tension, only the shear strength of transverse reinforcement remains. Note that under the SDC, Vc is zero regardless of how large the tension is. That is why for all the ground motions that result in tension, Red becomes equal to Vc divided by the sum of Vc and Vs, which is equal to 0.53. In the SDC, zeroing the concrete contribution to shear strength under tension makes a significant difference between ACI and SDC estimates. Maxdcr and the minimum of shear strength may not occur simultaneously in case of the ACI estimate. Therefore, Maxdcr may not increase significantly even if there is noticeable reduction in Red using ACI. In contrast,, Red using SDC may occur several times during the excitation and, in general, Maxdcr may occur during one of these times. Consequently, Maxdcr based on SDC equations increases significantly with the inclusion of the Z-component.
The average values of Maxdcr and Red for models Types 1 and 2 and all ARs are shown in Figure 2.10 using the ACI approach, Figure 2.21 using the SDC approach, Figure 2.22 using the Eurocode approach, and Figure 2.23 using the CSA approach. As shown, Maxdcr decreases as the AR increases, and Red increases as the AR increases even though it is a very small increase (almost constant) in the case of the ACI and Eurocode approaches. Moreover, the difference due to the number of horizontal components (one versus two) is less than 10% in Maxdcr for ACI, Eurocode, and SDC. In contrast, this difference is sometimes more than 10% in Maxdcr for CSA; this difference tends to increase as the AR decreases. However, all approaches are similar in producing larger Maxdcr with two horizontal components included compared to only one horizontal component. Finally, the effect of the vertical component is much more noticeable in Red where it decreases to 0.6 for some ground motions.
For all four codes, Red decreases when the vertical component is included, i.e., the capacity decreases with the inclusion of the vertical excitation. This is expected because the ACI, SDC, and Eurocode documents have an axial force term and CSA has an axial strain term. With vertical excitation, these terms fluctuate significantly, and the shear strength also goes up and down. Due to the discrepancy of the variation of the axial force of the cross section and that of the axial strain at the centroid (which is affected not only by the cross-section axial force but also by the cross-section bending moment), the shear strength estimate by CSA code is quite different from ACI, SDC, and Eurocode documents.
Figure 2.24 presents Maxdcr and Red for all 293 ground motions whose horizontal PGA’s are larger than 0.25g. Similar to Figure 2.18, Figure 2.24 shows the results for model Type 2 including the X+Y+Z and X+Y components. To avoid excluding ground motions that may have significant vertical excitation, all 293 motions (discussed in Section 2.1) were applied and analyzed. As observed in Figure 2.18, GM #1, #2, #3, #4, #7, and #10 in Appendix A have a significant decrease in Red with the inclusion of the vertical (Z) excitation.
Based on the results and discussions above, the main observations from the parametric study can be summarized as follows:
Due to considering both horizontal components, Maxdcr of the column subjected to X+Y+Z (or X+Y) is larger than that subjected to X+Z, Y+Z (or X, or Y).
Reduction of shear strength (Red) due to application of X+Y+Z (or X+Y) is smaller than that due to application of X+Z, Y+Z (or X, Y).
For shear strength demand to capacity ratio (Maxdcr) values, the order in estimates of different codes is Eurocode < ACI ≤ SDC < CSA, on average. The inequality between ACI and SDC holds when tension is present.
For shear strength reduction (Red) values, the order in estimates of different codes is CSA < SDC < ACI ≈ Eurocode, on average.
A smaller AR tends to have a larger Maxdcr, and a larger AR tends to have a slightly larger Red factor (i.e., it is reduced less).
The pattern of reduction factors found in the ACI, SDC, and Eurocode documents depends moderately on the vertical excitation. In cases of ACI-318-11 and the Eurocode, the reduction factors of several ground motions are less than 0.85. The ground motions that cause noticeable changes are #1, #2, #3, #4, #7, and #10 (descending order of PGAv, see Appendix A). The SDC has a unique pattern because its  is zero under tension regardless of the value of the tension.
The reduction factors in CSA do not depend on the vertical excitation as much as ACI-318-11, the SDC and the Eurocode. Their reduction pattern does not change significantly with or without the vertical component.
ACI-318-11, the SDC, and the Eurocode explicitly consider the axial force. Therefore, in the case without vertical excitation, their capacity predictions do not differ from ground motion to ground motion or from AR to AR compared to those from CSA.
CSA takes the effect of axial force into consideration by using axial strain at the centroid of the section, resulting in differences in the shear capacity predictions for different ground motions and different ARs in cases without vertical excitation, since the axial strain at the centroid of the section is not only affected by the axial force but also by the bending moment.
Among 3551 earthquake acceleration records in the PEER NGA database and discarding those records with only low-frequency content, 61 ground motions were selected as input candidates based on three criteria: (1) at least one of the horizontal components should have the PGA larger than 0.25g; (2) For the 20 pairs of periods Th-Tv (Tv=0.05, 0.1, 0.15, and 0.2 sec and Th=0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, and 0.8 sec), the PSav/PSah1 or PSav/PSah2 were calculated based on the ratio of the pseudo-spectral acceleration corresponding to the vertical component (PSav) to those corresponding to the horizontal components (PSah1, PSah2), where if one of these two ratios is larger than 1.0 in at least 15 pairs, the ground motion is selected as one of candidates; and (3) the arrival time interval between horizontal and vertical peak accelerations is considered, which affects the interaction of the horizontal and the vertical responses. The interval should be shorter than the cut-off of 1 sec.
A parametric study was conducted on columns designed with the modified effective circular section of Prototype 1 (ACB) and subjected to ground motions to evaluate the effect of vertical excitation. The following parameters were varied: ground motion, number of components, mass moment of inertia, and AR. First, 61 motions were applied. Second, three cases were considered, all three components versus two horizontal components, X and Z components versus X component, Y and Z components versus Y component. Third, the existence of the mass moment of inertia was considered, and its effect on the response examined. The mass moment of inertia of Prototype 1 (ACB) was applied to Type 2. Since Type 2-1 has no rigid end zone, it is identical to Type 1 except for the inclusion of mass moment inertia, and its lateral and rotational periods were obtained. Fourth, six ARs from 2.5 to 5.0 were taken into account.
The parametric study determined that: (1) the presence of two or one of the horizontal components does not produce significant differences; (2) except for Dz and Fz, the difference in other responses due to vertical excitation was not significant; (3) the effect of vertical excitation was significant in Fz, which could affect the shear strength for models Types 1 and 2; and (4) the difference in Dz or Fz between models Types 1 and 2 is relatively small. For other response parameters, the discrepancy between Types 1 and 2 becomes larger as the AR decreases. However, since the axial force is the only parameter that was significantly affected by the vertical excitation, it can be concluded that the differences between Types 1 and 2 (especially Type 2-1) may not be important for the purpose of this study.
The effect of axial force on the shear strength was investigated using different shear strength code approaches. Comparing the shear demand to the shear strength, the maximum ratio of shear demand and shear strength, Maxdcr, and the reduction of the shear strength due to the earthquake vertical excitation, Red, were calculated. Maxdcr of the column subjected to X+Y+Z (or X+Y) was larger than that subjected to X+Z, Y+Z (or X, or Y). For Maxdcr, Eurocode < ACI ≤ SDC < CSA, regarding the general order in estimates. Red due to application of X+Y+Z (or X+Y) was smaller than that due to application of X+Z, Y+Z (or X, or Y). For Red, CSA < SDC < ACI ≈ Eurocode, regarding the general order in estimates. Moreover, a smaller AR tends to have a larger Maxdcr, and a larger AR tends to have a slightly larger Red, i.e., it is reduced less. Note that ACI, SDC, and Eurocode documents explicitly consider axial force. CSA, however, takes the effect of axial force into consideration by using axial strain at the centroid of the cross section, resulting in differences in the shear capacity predictions for different ground motions and different ARs, even cases without vertical excitation. This is because the axial strain at the centroid of the cross-section is not only affected by the axial force but also by the bending moment.
Dynamic testing is the optimum method to replicate earthquake input motions. Due to limitation of facilities, to date only a few shaking table tests have been conducted to examine the effect of vertical acceleration on bridge columns. To perform tests on the UC Berkeley shaking table at the Richmond Field Station (RFS), 1/4-scale bridge column specimens, instrumentation, and input sequence were prepared to investigate the response of a bridge column subjected to the horizontal and vertical dynamic excitations.
In 1969, Professors J. Penzien and Ray Clough led the design of the world’s first shaking table at the RFS. After several upgrades over the decades, it is now has six degrees-of-freedom (6 DOFs), with three translational and three rotational components of motions. Operated by the Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research (PEER) Center, it is now the largest 6 DOFs shaking table in the U.S.
The shaking table is stiffened by heavy transverse ribs, and the eight horizontal hydraulic actuators (four in each direction) are attached to the ribs. The four vertical actuators are attached to the table by post-tensioning rods at points located 1.5 ft×1.5 ft (305 mm× 05 mm) from each corner. All 12 actuators are 75 kips (334 kN) capacity hydraulic actuators and connected to a 1580-kips (7028-kN) reaction block. As a result, about 3g can be achieved when the table is empty, which weighs about 100 kips (445 kN). Decoupling of components is accomplished by the length of the actuators and the control system. A unique feature of the UC-Berkeley shaking table is that a 1.5-psi air pressure supports the total weight of the table and specimen while the table is in operation. This feature allows the hydraulic actuators to operate more efficiently during dynamic loading. Table 3.1 summarizes the characteristics of the UC-Berkeley shaking table. As discussed in next section, fidelity tests were performed before the actual RC bridge column tests to confirm the performance of the shaking table.
In the presence of vertical excitation, the shaking table is governed by its own frequency, and it is not possible to reproduce all frequencies of the input motion exactly. Therefore, it may not be possible to reproduce some motions. Performing fidelity tests is the considered approach to select suitable motions for the intended dynamic tests. On March 19, 29, and April 2, 2010, a total of 30 trials were conducted to check the table’s performance and the feasibility of inputting four different ground motions selected from the PEER NGA database [2013]; see Section 2.1.
To verify the shaking table performance, it is important to ensure that the fidelity test set- up similar to the intended dynamic test specimen. Even though it is not feasible to achieve the exact horizontal and vertical periods comparable to those of the real specimen, the over-turning moment due to the height of the center of gravity (C.G.)—which is one of the main factors affecting the table performance—under vertical and horizontal excitation inputs can be controlled by stacking mass blocks and supporting steel beams.
The geometrical scale of the set-up corresponds to the 1/4-scaled prototype. The total weight is 118 kips (525 kN) and the C.G. is 9 ft (2.74 m) above the table (see Figures. 3.1 and 3.2). Locations of the instruments placed on the shaking table and the mass blocks are shown in Figure 3.3. Since the specimen is a 1/4 scale (length scale== prototype length/model length = 4), each ground motion is compressed in time using a factor of 2.
The ground motions listed in Table 3.2 were selected based on the analysis using a full-scale single-column model with an AR of 3.5 (see Chapter 2). Ground motions 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, and 9 (earthquake records #3, 1, 15, 9, 4, and 7, respectively, see Table A.1) were selected from the 80 ground motions. This satisfies the first and second criteria listed in Section 2.1, based on the capacity reduction calculated using the ACI equation (RedACI <0.8) and a comparison of demand and capacity history. Ground motions 4, 6, 8, and 10 (earthquake records #10, 8, N/A (because it belongs to the 80 records not the 61 records listed), and 28 in Table A.1) were added because the ductility demand is high (even though they are not selected based on the Red and Maxdcr values). Note that X-component produced a more significant effect on Red, Maxdcr, and displacement ductility, rather than Y-component. Therefore, only PGA for X-component was specified in Table 3.2.
Because the performance of the shaking table needs to be verified for the entire intensity level range which will be applied in the dynamic tests, magnitude scales for different intensity levels should be determined. Based on the results from the parametric study in Chapter 2, these scales were calculated as follows:
Nonlinear time history analyses of the full-scale single-column were conducted using the full-scale ground motions with the larger of the two horizontal components (referred to as X component) and the vertical (Z) component. The force reduction factor (R) was calculated from the obtained ductility values, , based on the equal energy assumption by Newmark and Hall [1982], i.e., . The scale factor for ‘Yield Level’ was subsequently calculated as .
Because significant strain hardening is expected, the maximum considered earthquake (MCE) level is assumed to correspond to ductility = 2, hence the force reduction factor corresponding to MCE level (RMCE) was calculated as .
The scale factor for MCE was calculated as RMCE multiplied by the scale of the yield level, which is equal to 1.73/R.
For simplicity and to preserve the basis of the selection criteria mentioned in Section 2.1, the scale factors determined for the horizontal components using the above procedure were utilized for the vertical components as well.
Note that the MCE level was not determined from the USGS maps (using the typical method of site-specific pseudo-acceleration, Sa, at low and high periods and then finding Sa at the specific period) because the site of the prototype bridge resulted in small Sa values. Instead of choosing another site, the MCE level was determined based on the response. In addition, although the maximum ductility achieved in the tests with the actual specimen were about five in the dynamic tests (see Table 4.1), the scales determined using the assumption of ductility = 2 (as mentioned in item 2 above) was sufficient to evaluate the table performance since the scales determined in this manner resulted in accelerations close to the table limits.
After further elimination based on the demand and capacity histories, ground motions 1, 5, 7, and 9 were utilized in the fidelity tests with the determined scales (in terms of the target PGA after filtering, as mentioned below) and are listed in Table 3.3. As mentioned before, all ground motions were compressed in time using a factor of two. The ground motions were filtered using a filter range of 0.6~30 Hz for the X components and 2~60 Hz for Z components to accommodate the displacement limits of the shaking table.
Among the four ground motions shown in Figures 3.4 to 3.14, GM7 seems to be the most suitable input given the shaking table performance. In these figures, the expected natural period range of the test specimens and its elongation due to damage is identified in terms of the important frequency range (in this study) using double headed horizontal arrows. In addition, In addition, the legend “f-measured” in these figures stands for the filtered measured data. As discussed, the shaking table does not reproduce frequencies over the entire range in the vertical direction. For example, for each ground motion, the response spectrum of the measured vertical acceleration has a sharp peak at 5~15 Hz, a valley at 15~30 Hz, and another peak around 45 Hz. Therefore, ground motions with spectra like GM1 (Figures 3.4 and 3.5), GM5 (Figures 3.6 and 3.7), or to a lesser extent GM9 (Figures 3.11 to 3.14) are not suitable to be replicated on the UC-Berkeley shaking table. In most cases, the measured horizontal acceleration spectra are much more similar to the target spectra compared to the case of the vertical spectra.
Results of GM7 0.5-yield, yield, and MCE levels are shown in Figures 3.8, 3.9, and 3.10, respectively. The corresponding scale factors are 0.33, 0.66, and 1.14 compared to the originally recorded motion. In the important frequency range defined by the horizontal double headed arrow, the shaking table has an acceptable performance in matching the target spectra for yield and MCE levels of GM7 for both of the horizontal and vertical components. Basic information on GM7 is available in PEER NGA database [2013]; Table 3.4 shows the record and station information. The Northridge earthquake occurred on January 17, 1994, in Los Angeles, California. The epicenter was in Reseda and the hypocenter latitude and longitude were 34.2057 and -118.554, respectively.
The strong-motion response of Pacoima Dam was recorded by a network of California Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG) accelerometers. Pacoima Dam is a 365 ft (111.25 m) high concrete arch dam, with a thickness at the crown cross section that varies from 10.4 ft (3.17 m) at the crest to 99 ft (30.18 m) at the base. GM7 was recorded at the station on the left abutment, and its peak acceleration was 1.5g. Considering the peak acceleration at a downstream location was 0.44g and that at 80% of the height was 2.3g, frequency-dependent topological amplification affected the ground motion significantly; see Fenves and Mojtahedi [1995] and Alves [2005]. The motion of the dam had higher frequency components than those at the base or downstream. Moreover, Alves [2005] points out that the ground motion delays are consistent with the seismic waves traveling upward along the canyon, and that the waves appear to be dispersive because the delays are frequency-dependent. Fenves and Mojtahedi [1995] presumed that higher frequency components were possibly caused by higher mode contributions of the dam or impact due to pounding of contraction joints.
The GM7 obtained from the PEER NGA database [2013] does not have a higher frequency content compared to the other ground motions, i.e., GM1, GM5, or GM9, as shown in Figures 3.4 to 3.14. In particular, the frequency content of the vertical component of GM7 mostly leans towards lower frequency range compared to the other three ground motions (refer to Figures 3.8 to 3.10). It makes GM7 the most suitable motion to be reproduced by the table amongst four ground motions. 
After the completion of the fidelity tests, MCE level was determined to be the highest intensity level that could be applied with acceptable shaking table performance. This determination was based on the following calculations. The capacity of a vertical actuator is given as 77 kips (342.5 kN). There are four vertical actuators that should be able to resist (a) the vertical force due to vertical acceleration applied on the shaking table and test set-up and (b) the vertical force due to horizontal acceleration of the test set-up. It is noted that the damping force has been ignored for simplicity. The vertical force mentioned in (a) above is expressed as , where , , , and  are the shaking table mass, test set-up mass, vertical acceleration measured on the shaking table, and vertical acceleration measured on the mass blocks, respectively. This vertical force in (a) can be approximately expressed as  for all four vertical actuators because  in most cases. On the other hand, the vertical force mentioned in (b) above is expressed as , where  and  are the height of the C.G. [9 ft (2.74 m)] and the arm length between the opposite two pairs of the vertical actuators [17 ft (5.18 m)]. Therefore, two different equations can be used to determine the axial force demand of each vertical actuator. 
 (3.1a)
 (3.1b)
Figure 3.15 shows the history of the axial forces calculated using these equations; note that both equations exceed the actuator force limit of 77 kips (342.5 kN) during short durations.
Since the forces are not obtained as a result of direct measurements but through calculations, the exceedance of the actuator force limits is further validated through an alternative calculation. Considering the shaking table weight is about 100 kips (445 kN), it is reasonable to accept that the acceleration limit of the empty shaking table (i.e., without any test specimen) is about 3g (precisely,). The total fidelity test set-up and shaking table weight is 218 kips (970 kN). Therefore, the maximum achievable vertical acceleration is . Figure 3.16 shows this limit and the acceleration history of each vertical actuator. Note that the actuators on the north side (V2 and V3) tend to have larger acceleration values than those on the south (V1 and V4), but both pairs exceed the average limit of 1.41g.
Although the calculated forces and measured accelerations of the individual actuators are slightly higher than the indicated limits for very short durations of time, the average measured accelerations of all four vertical actuators are below the limit. Figure 3.17 compares the average vertical acceleration history of the four actuators below the table and that measured on the east and west sides on the shaking table (accelerometers in Figure 3.3). The plotted time histories are slightly below the shaking table limits by a small margin. Hence, for good performance of the shaking table in this study, the MCE of GM7 for the specified mass and C.G. height of the test specimen is considered as the maximum excitation level that can be applied. Note that all the vertical acceleration data used in Figures 3.15 to 3.17 were filtered; the filter range was [0.01, 40] Hz.
Based on the results of the fidelity tests:
The performance of the UC-Berkeley shaking table is acceptable to test the proposed mass and C.G. height of the 1/4-scale test specimen. Therefore, the proposed testing regimen is feasible unless bigger mass or higher C.G is utilized.
Among the four ground motions that were selected based on the analytical study, GM7 is the most suitable for dynamic tests with vertical excitation considering the shaking table characteristics.
The GM7-MCE level is the highest level that was applied in the fidelity tests; the response spectra suggest that the shaking table performance is still acceptable. However, based on the measured vertical accelerations this intensity level was found to be near the limits of the shaking table. Hence, sufficient performance is not expected if a stronger excitation is applied, or if a bigger mass or higher C.G is utilized. Therefore, the GM7-MCE level and the fidelity set-up mass and C.G height are considered as defining the upper limit for the excitation and specimen configuration in this study.
The Plumas-Arboga Overhead Bridge (PAOB) was selected as the prototype for designing the test specimens since its AR was closer to the desired value than that of ACB. Note that ACB was the prototype for the parametric study in Chapter 2 and not for the test specimen. In Section 2.2.2, the superstructure, original column cross section, and modified effective circular column cross section of the prototype were described. The circular cross-section was scaled down using a scale of 1/4 for the test specimen.
A column with a low AR () is expected to show shear or flexure-shear behavior. As discussed in Section 2.5.1, Maxdcr tends to increase as the AR decreases. To represent real bridge columns constructed in California, the test specimen was designed to have an AR of 3.5 for the dynamic tests.
The two specimens were identical in design except for the transverse reinforcement ratio. The comparisons of cross-section properties are summarized in Table 3.5. Section A is the cross section of the PAOB. Sections B and C are the cross sections of the first and second specimens (SP1 and SP2), respectively. These cross sections are illustrated in Figure 3.18
Confined concrete properties (peak stress and strain, , respectively, and ultimate stress and strain, , respectively) for each cross section were calculated based on Mander [Mander et al., 1988]. The  of each cross section was calculated assuming the yield strength of the longitudinal and transverse reinforcing bars , respectively, of 60 ksi (413.7 MPa); an AR of 3.5.  and  were calculated based on the ACI equations defined in Chapter 2.
Table 3.5 specified the concrete contribution to the shear capacity, , for the ‘maximum tension’ and ‘gravity only.’ The maximum tension was estimated as 1.98g, assuming the pseudo-acceleration of GM7-MCE level (corresponding to 114% of the original record) at 0.03 sec with 2% damping The vertical period, 0.03 sec, was calculated from the mass configuration in determined in Section 3.4.1.2 and from axial stiffness EA/L.
Mass at the top of the test specimen was determined to match 6.5% axial load ratio (ALR) as listed in Table 3.6. The mass moment of inertia (MMI) was calculated as 64.0 t-m2 (47.2×103 slug-ft2) by scaling MMI of the prototype column using similitude relationships; see Section 3.5.1.1. The MMI of the prototype column was determined such that the lateral period of the column matched the lateral period of the full-scale bridge system. Mass corresponding to 6.5% ALR was used in both of the single column and bridge system models. By using the same mass and matching the modal properties, the best resemblance between the prototype column in the bridge system model and that in the single-column model was achieved. Finally, the calculated MMI for the prototype column and the test specimen were 12.084×106 slug-ft2 (16384 t-m2) and 47.2×103 slug-ft2 (64.0 t-m2), respectively. A proper combination of concrete blocks, lead blocks, and steel beams on the test specimen ensured the desired weight for the intended ALR, MMI, and height of C.G.
Two specimens were under construction from July 8 to July 28, 2010. The construction procedure included installing strain gages on the reinforcing steel bars, form-work, making reinforcing bar cages, placing the desired concrete mix, curing the cast concrete, stripping the forms, and finally transporting the specimen and attaching it to the shaking table. Detailed construction procedure and construction photographs are presented in Appendix B.
For reliable estimation of the capacity of test specimens, material properties were obtained by conducting material tests for standard concrete cylinders and samples of the reinforcing steel bars. These material tests were conducted in the material and structure laboratory, Davis Hall, UC-Berkeley.
The concrete mix was specified as normal weight concrete with the 28th-day design strength of 4 ksi (27.58 MPa). Detailed concrete mix design specifications are presented in Table 3.7. A total of forty-eight 6 in.×12 in. concrete cylinders were prepared at the time the columns were cast. Three cylinders were tested on the 7th, 14th, 20th, and 28th days, the day of preliminary stiffness tests (72nd day), the days of tests (93rd and 111th days), and the 406th day, as specified in Table 3.8, where  and s  represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively. Figure 3.19 presents the strength maturity curve based on these cylinder tests. The strength gradually increased until the 28th day, and the mean strength reached 85% of the design strength; however, the second and third cylinders on the 72nd day and all the cylinders on the 93rd days had relatively lower strength. The strength from these cylinders was significantly low even compared to expected values based on the linear interpolation between the mean values on the 28th and 111th days. Possible errors in concrete sampling and testing of these cylinders are suspected in causing this discrepancy.
The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) (ASTM C31 [2010]) procedure for casting of concrete cylinders and testing was followed in this study. According to ASTM C172 [2010], it is important to obtain a sample of concrete that is representative of the concrete in the truck mixer and this sample should be obtained from the middle of the truck load. At least three portions of discharge are necessary to obtain a representative sample, since it is assumed that the first or last discharge portions from the load will not provide a representative sample. Using the last discharge might have caused the large deviations shown in Table 3.8 and Figure 3.19. In addition, the strength values on the 93rd day are clustered between 2.9 and 3.5 ksi. Their standard deviation was not as large as those on the 28th and 72nd days. This implies that there is a high probability there was a mistake in testing the cylinders on the 93rd day. Of course, the possibility of choosing three low-strength cylinders cannot be ignored.
A sample stress-strain relationship that was obtained from one of the tested cylinders is shown in Figure 3.20. From this figure, the obtained compressive strength is 3.9 ksi (26.89 MPa), the corresponding peak strain is 0.35%, and the initial tangent modulus is 2500 ksi (17.24 GPa). The secant modulus, which connects the origin and the point of , is 2330 ksi (16.06 GPa), as specified in Figure 3.20.
The strength and elastic modulus of reinforcing bars had to be tested to estimate the response of the test specimen. Both longitudinal and transverse (i.e., hoops) steel reinforcing bars of the columns are tested. Number 5 bars were used as longitudinal reinforcement. To check their properties, these bars were sampled from the test specimens after testing. Since the middle of the test specimen was not damaged, the portions of the longitudinal bars in the middle of the test specimen remained elastic, allowing them to be tested. A total of four tensile tests were conducted on September 28, 2011. In addition, four tensile tests were conducted on May 27, 2010, to confirm the properties of the #2 reinforcing bars used as hoops, as shown in the photograph of Figure 3.21(d). Figure 3.21(a) and (b) show the obtained stress-strain relationships of the longitudinal and transverse reinforcement, respectively. One linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) was used to measure the displacement between two points with 2 in. (51 mm) spacing. For the #2 bar, a strain gage was placed to measure strain at one point in the middle of the LVDT gage length. As shown in Figure 3.21(b), both stress-strain relationships are very similar. However, as shown in Figure 3.21(c), the strain from the LVDT had a slightly steeper slope and smaller strain after 5%-strain, which corresponds to 87 ksi (599.84 MPa) in stress. This is due to the difference in measuring the strain, i.e., the strain from the strain gage near the necking point is larger than that obtained by the LVDT averaging over its 2 in. (51 mm) gage length. Table 3.9 summarizes the properties of both reinforcing bars. The yield stress was calculated based on the 0.1% offset method [ASTM Standard E8/E8M, 2009].
Two shaking table tests were conducted at the Richmond Field Station Earthquake Simulator, at Richmond Field Station of UC-Berkeley. As shown in Figure 3.22(a), the specimen was placed at the center of the shaking table using a thick large transition steel plate, 8 ft×8 ft×3.35 in. (2.44 m×2.44 m×85 mm), for better shaking table performance and control purposes, which was critical due to weight of the specimen. To prevent collapse and avoid sliding of the specimen during testing, steel chains shown in this figure were connected to the prestressing rods for the top concrete blocks.
As mentioned previously, the test specimens were scaled from the prototype column by using a length scale of 4. Keeping the accelerations and stresses the same for the prototype and the scaled columns led to the following scale factors for time, mass, and MMI. 
The test columns were 20 in (508 mm) in diameter and 70 in (1778 mm) in height. For longitudinal reinforcement, 16#5 bars were used for both specimens, and the longitudinal reinforcement ratio was 1.563%. For transverse reinforcement, #2 hoops were used where the first specimen (SP1) had 2 in (51 mm) spacing; the second specimen (SP2) had 3 in. (76 mm) spacing. For both specimens, the spacing was uniform over the entire column height. The volumetric ratio of the transverse reinforcement was 0.545% for SP1 and 0.363% for SP2 as listed in Table 3.5. The LRFD Bridge Design Specifications (BDS) by AASHTO [2012] provide the required minimum volumetric ratio as 0.468%. Therefore, SP1 satisfied the BDS; SP2, however, did not satisfy the BDS in terms of the transverse reinforcement. Finally, the weight of the column, except for the footing, was about 3.9 kips (17.35 kN); see Appendix C for a complete set of drawings of the test specimens.
The 8 ft×8 ft×3.35 in. (2.44 m×2.44 m×85 mm), base steel plate was designed to place the test specimen at the center of the shaking table. Nine 2.5 in. (64 mm) holes were drilled to connect the plate to the shaking table, and 16 7/8 in. (22 mm) tap (threaded) holes were drilled to connect the load cells to the plate; see Appendix C for design details of the base plate.
The 60 in.×60 in.×18 in. (1524 mm×1524 mm×457 mm) footing was designed to fix the column to the shaking table and was reinforced with #6 deformed bars in both longitudinal directions and #3 ties in the transverse direction. The footing was set on four load cells, one at each corner. The footing weight was about 5.7 kips (25.35 kN); see Appendix C for footing details.
The top steel beams were designed to resist prestressing forces and to support inertia forces of the mass blocks (which consisted of two concrete blocks and 72 lead blocks). The four beam cross sections, HSS 20×12, were designed to have small deflection and enough flexural capacity to resist the bending moment produced in the tests. Figure 3.23 shows the layout of these four beams and the number of attached lead blocks; see Appendix C for more information on the design of steel beams. The lead blocks were hung by four prestressing rods fixed at the tip of smaller HSS pipes, which were welded to the top of the four steel beams; see Figure 3.24.
As explained in Section 3.4.1.2, the target ALR was 6.5%, but the additional weight of steel beams and miscellaneous items caused a slightly heavier gravity load on the column. Finally, 6.8% ALR, i.e., about 85.6 kips, was achieved by two concrete blocks and 72 lead blocks on the column (Figure 3.23), a monolithically case top block with the column, and the tie assembly. The concrete blocks were identical in dimension and weight: each block was 10 ft×10 ft×14 in. (3045 mm×3048 mm×356 mm) in dimensions and weighed about 16.5 kips (73.4 kN), i.e., the total of weight of the concrete blocks was 33 kips (146.8 kN). The lead blocks were also identical; each lead block was 27 in.×21 in.×3.5 in. (686 mm×533 mm×89 mm) in dimension and weighted 0.5 kips (2.22 kN), i.e., the total weight of the lead blocks was 36 kips (160.1 kN). As a result, the center of gravity (C.G.) was about 8.5 ft (2591 mm) above the shaking table, as dictated by the test set-up shown in Figure 3.24.12
A total of 38 strain gages were installed on the reinforcing bars for each test specimen. Eighteen gages were installed on longitudinal bars (L) and 20 gages on transverse bars (H) at the following locations (defined by the column diameter, D, and the column height, H):
As shown in Appendix D, linear position transducers (Novotechnik), DCDTs, wire potentiometers, accelerometers, and load cells were installed to obtain local deformation, global displacement, acceleration, and restoring force, respectively. These instruments were installed in the following locations: 
A total of 14 Novotechniks were installed to measure local deformation on the north and south sides of the column. They were mounted on threaded rods penetrating through the column in the horizontal loading direction, as shown in Appendix D. A total of six rods were kept unbonded from the surrounding concrete by a gap of 1/16 in. (1.6 mm) around the rod, except at the center of the column. The bonded length was roughly 14 in. (356 mm). Each rod had a brace on each side to fix the Novotechnik and its wire. Locations of these measurements are given in Appendix D. From the Novotechnik data one can calculate the strain at D/2, D, 3D/2, and 2D from the bottom and at D/2 from the top. These strains obtained from the displacement measurements can be compared to the strains obtained directly from the reinforcing bar strain gages. In addition, section curvatures can also be obtained by using these computed strains on the north and south sides of the column. Moreover, two DCDTs were installed to capture the vertical displacement of the top concrete block. They were located 7 in. (178 mm) off from the east and west sides of the column.
A total of 19 wire potentiometers were installed to measure displacement of the test specimen. They captured the displacement in the longitudinal (X), transverse (Y) and vertical (Z) directions. These measurements were arranged as follows:
A total of 18 accelerometers were installed to measure acceleration at the following points. Four 3D accelerometers were located at each corner of the base plate, one below the top block, and four at each corner of the top of the concrete blocks. Eight 1D accelerometers were attached along the height on the north side of the column, and one at the center on the top concrete block to measure the vertical acceleration.
Four tri-axial load cells support the specimen at the four corners below its footing to measure axial load and shear forces in the X- and Y-directions.
The dynamic tests to examine the effect of vertical excitation on shear strength of RC bridge columns were designed within capacity of the UC-Berkeley shaking table located at the Richmond Field Station. The 1/4-geometric scale for the test specimens as selected. To confirm shaking table performance, fidelity tests were conducted with steel beams and concrete blocks stacked on the shaking table. Even though the periods were not comparable to those of the scaled prototype, the mass of the shaking table—which weighed 118 kips, and the center of gravity 9 ft —were comparable to those of the test specimens. Four ground motions were selected from 80 ground motions, satisfying the first and second and criteria determined in Section 2.1. They were chosen based on capacity reduction (parameter Ted defined in Chapter 2) calculated using the ACI-318-11 equation and on comparison of demand and capacity history. A total of 30 trials were conducted and the input motion was finalized. The intensity limit of the applied motion was also identified.
Each RC column—SP1 and SP2—was designed as a 1/4-scaled prototype. Both SP1 and SP2 had a longitudinal reinforcement ratio of 1.563%, which is close to the prototype value. The transverse reinforcement ratio of SP1 was close to that of the prototype, but SP2 had 2/3 of that of SP1, achieved by adjustment the hoop spacing. The mass on the column was identical in both specimens. Assuming =4 ksi (27.58 MPa) and 6.5% axial load ratio and including miscellaneous weight, a 85.6 kip-weight (38.83 ton) was placed on each column. The total weight on the table was slightly over 100 kips (45.36 ton). The center of gravity of each specimen was about 8.5 ft (2591 mm) above the table. A base plate and prestressing rods were placed to hold the specimen at the center of the shaking table. Steel chains held the mass blocks to avoid unexpected movement that might cause safety concerns.
A total of 38 strain gages were installed on the reinforcing bars of each specimen. Eighteen gages were attached to the longitudinal bars and 20 gages were attached to the hoops. For external instrumentation, nine 3D accelerometers, nine 1D accelerometers, 4 load cells, 14 Novotechniks, 2 DCDT, and 19 wire potentiometers were used.
The 1994 Northridge earthquake recorded at the upper abutment of Pacoima Dam was selected to be applied to the test specimens with increasing intensity, from 5% to 125%-scale. The 2D excitation in X and Z was planned in most cases, but the 1D excitation in X was also planned to be applied in some cases as these 1D runs are helpful in observing differences in response due to the effect of the vertical excitation. The detailed test sequence will be discussed in Section 4.1.
This chapter presents the computational models developed in order to predict the response of the tested bridge columns. In addition to the conventional modeling of RC columns, a new shear spring was developed and implemented in the utilized computational platform, OpenSees [2000], in order to incorporate shear strength estimation based on ACI-318-11 [2011] or Caltrans SDC [2013] equations. Various response quantities obtained from the different models were compared with the test results to evaluate the developed computational models.
OpenSees [2000], a software framework for developing applications to simulate the performance of structural systems, provides a considerable number of material models. However, none of the existing models can be directly employed to model the variation of the shear capacity as a function of the axial force or the ductility as implied by the code equations such as ACI-318-11 or the Caltrans SDC. In this section, existing material models are discussed and a new material model for SDC or ACI-based shear springs is proposed.
Massone et al. [2006] proposed and developed a beam-column element model that includes flexure and shear interaction in OpenSees. They modified the displacement-based element that already included linear curvature and constant axial strain distributions to include shear deformation. Element formulation (fiber element), sectional analysis, and fiber modeling were modified.
Based on linear interpolation of the curvature and constant axial strain, a third strain component was included to account for shear flexibility. The fiber discretization no longer leads to just uniaxial behavior but rather a bidirectional response by incorporating a membrane material model based on simple uniaxial stress-strain relationships for concrete and steel. Although the material models can be cyclic, the element model formulation has been implemented and verified initially for monotonic static analysis. Details of the formulation can be found in Massone et al. [2006]. The compatibility equations to relate nodal displacements and internal strains are defined only in 2D. Therefore, 3D analysis is not possible using this element. In addition, only a specific geometric transformation called "LinearInt", which is based on the traditional geometric linear transformation, can be used.
The proposed modeling approach in Massone et al. [2006] involves incorporating RC panel behavior into a macroscopic fiber-based model. Results obtained with the analytical model were compared to test results for a slender wall and four short wall specimens [Massone et al. 2006]. A reasonably good lateral load-displacement response prediction was obtained for the slender wall. Although the model underestimated the inelastic shear deformations experienced by the wall, shear yielding and coupled nonlinear shear-flexure behavior were successfully represented in the analysis results. Unfortunately, the above-mentioned code equations (ACI or Caltrans SDC) cannot be represented with this element since it does not consider the effect of axial force in the shear strength estimation.
Elwood and Moehle [2003] developed “Limit State” material models based on the existing hysteretic material in OpenSees. Each Limit State material model can be interpreted as a spring in series with the nonlinear beam-column element. It captures the additional deformations—either shear or axial—that take place after detection of failure. The Limit State material uses a drift capacity model to determine the point of shear or axial failure for a column (see Figure 6.1) and subsequently controls the post-failure response of the element resulting in strength degradation. In this Limit State material, empirical drift capacity models at shear failure are proposed [Equations (6.1) and (6.2)], where the influence of axial load (P) on the drift ratio is taken into consideration only for columns with transverse reinforcement ratio.
Equations (6.1) and (6.2) were proposed to be used in modeling shear-critical columns only, i.e., if the shear capacity defined by an appropriate shear strength model is exceeded by the shear demand calculated according to accepted analytical procedures. The axial failure model was also derived by Elwood and Moehle [2003] to determine how much axial load must be transferred to neighboring elements after a column shear failure and to aid in quantifying the ability of a structural system to resist collapse; the results of this collapse analysis are beyond the scope of this research. Moreover, the data used for calibration of the shear and axial limit curve equations are derived from column experiments conducted mostly under compressive axial loads and none under tensile loads, the relevant topic for the test specimens discussed herein. For an interested reader in the topic of progressive collapse analysis, refer to Talaat and Mosalam [2008].
The proposed drift capacity model defined by Equations (6.1) and (6.2) (and schematically demonstrated with Figures 6.1 and 6.2) represents the shear failure modeling and estimation in an alternative approach compared to the code equations, in the sense of defining a drift ratio corresponding to shear failure rather than defining the shear failure in terms of shear strength and reducing the shear strength as a function of ductility or axial tensile force. The use of this drift capacity model is not applicable in this study since Equation (6.2) is derived from a database of tests with only axial compression; it does not represent the investigated axial tension effects caused by including the vertical acceleration component of the ground motion.
The proposed drift capacity model defined by Equations (6.1) and (6.2) (and schematically demonstrated with Figures 6.1 and 6.2) represents the shear failure modeling and estimation in an alternative approach compared to the code equations, in the sense of defining a drift ratio corresponding to shear failure rather than defining the shear failure in terms of shear strength and reducing the shear strength as a function of ductility or axial tensile force. The use of this drift capacity model is not applicable in this study since Equation (6.2) is derived from a database of tests with only axial compression; it does not represent the investigated axial tension effects caused by including the vertical acceleration component of the ground motion.
Incorporation of ACI and SDC code equations for shear capacity into OpenSees is achieved by proposing a new material and implementing it into OpenSees’ source code. Although, a common and intended use of this new material for a zero-length element connected to a beam-column element, it can be directly employed within a beam column element by aggregating the material into a section. The former approach is followed in the analyses conducted within this study. Considered cases are designated as ‘ACI shear spring’ and ‘SDC shear spring’ in order to represent ACI and SDC equations, respectively. The force-displacement relationship of the proposed spring material model is shown in Figure 3.1. This relationship is based on a bilinear envelope (for simplicity), which is defined by the initial stiffness (Kelastic), the yield force (Vy), and the hardening ratio for post-yield stiffness (r). Initial stiffness is the shear stiffness calculated as GA/L, where G is the shear modulus, A is shear area, and L is the length of the column. Before yielding, the yield force is updated at each integration time step with Equations (1.1) to (1.6) for ACI shear spring using the axial force at that time step in Equations (1.5) and (1.6), and with Equations (1.32) to (1.38) for Caltrans SDC shear spring using the displacement ductility and axial force at that time step in Equations (1.34) to (1.37). The displacement ductility is calculated as the displacement at a specified node (the node at the top of the column in the analyses presented here) normalized by the yield displacement, both of which (the node number and the yield displacement) are input parameters to the new material model in OpenSees.
At the time step where the demand reaches capacity, yielding takes place and the force-displacement relationship follows post-yield behavior. The yield force is not updated and kept constant afterwards unless the column is subjected to any value of axial tension (in the case of the Caltrans SDC spring) and a predetermined value of tension (specified as an input parameter) in the case of the ACI spring. The yield force is kept constant after this final modification. The basis of this second modification is the significant change of the yield force as a result of axial tension. In the case of ACI spring, if the predetermined tension value takes place before any yielding, the yield force is not updated after reaching this predefined tension value. This option permits investigating yielding dynamics in the close vicinity of the maximum axial tension. For example, if the maximum axial tension, which produces significant reduction in shear strength, takes place before a shear peak with a small time interval in between, and the demand does not reach the capacity, a potential yielding may not be captured unless the yield force is kept constant in this small interval. The yielding would take place if the axial and shear peaks were closer. In addition, as mentioned in Chapter 5, it was observed that the shear strength degradation was due to the existence of previous tensile peaks during the tests. Such an option was not required for the SDC shear spring since the shear force is explicitly kept constant in the SDC equation in the mentioned small interval (because the contribution of concrete to the shear strength is zero under any value of tension).
