This chapter presents the analyses conducted prior to the planned shaking table tests on the PEER earthquake simulator of University of California, Berkeley (UCB). Results of these analyses were utilized as a guidance to select the ground motions, column geometry, and reinforcement, and the set-up of the shaking table tests. First, the method used for selecting a smaller number of critical ground motions from a larger set is presented. Subsequently, the possible representative bridge prototypes are described. Finally, a parametric study conducted for a single column based on one of the prototypes is described, and the results of this parametric study are presented.
The presence of one or both of the horizontal components does not produce significant differences.
Except for the axial displacement and force ( and ), the difference in other response quantities due to vertical excitation is not significant, less than 5%, in general.
For both models Types 1 and 2, the effect of vertical excitation is significant in , with the potential to affect their shear strength.
The difference in  or  in Type 1 and Type 2 is relatively small. For other response parameters, the difference between Type 1 and Type 2 cannot be ignored, and becomes larger as the AR of column becomes smaller. However, since the axial force is the only important parameter that is significantly affected by vertical excitation, it can be concluded that the differences between models Types 1 and 2 are not important for the purposes of this study. These differences are even less important between Types 1 and 2-1.
Based on the results and discussions above, the main observations from the parametric study can be summarized as follows:
Due to considering both horizontal components, Maxdcr of the column subjected to X+Y+Z (or X+Y) is larger than that subjected to X+Z, Y+Z (or X, or Y).
Reduction of shear strength (Red) due to application of X+Y+Z (or X+Y) is smaller than that due to application of X+Z, Y+Z (or X, Y).
For shear strength demand to capacity ratio (Maxdcr) values, the order in estimates of different codes is Eurocode < ACI ≤ SDC < CSA, on average. The inequality between ACI and SDC holds when tension is present.
For shear strength reduction (Red) values, the order in estimates of different codes is CSA < SDC < ACI ≈ Eurocode, on average.
A smaller AR tends to have a larger Maxdcr, and a larger AR tends to have a slightly larger Red factor (i.e., it is reduced less).
The pattern of reduction factors found in the ACI, SDC, and Eurocode documents depends moderately on the vertical excitation. In cases of ACI-318-11 and the Eurocode, the reduction factors of several ground motions are less than 0.85. The ground motions that cause noticeable changes are #1, #2, #3, #4, #7, and #10 (descending order of PGAv, see Appendix A). The SDC has a unique pattern because its  is zero under tension regardless of the value of the tension.
The reduction factors in CSA do not depend on the vertical excitation as much as ACI-318-11, the SDC and the Eurocode. Their reduction pattern does not change significantly with or without the vertical component.
ACI-318-11, the SDC, and the Eurocode explicitly consider the axial force. Therefore, in the case without vertical excitation, their capacity predictions do not differ from ground motion to ground motion or from AR to AR compared to those from CSA.
CSA takes the effect of axial force into consideration by using axial strain at the centroid of the section, resulting in differences in the shear capacity predictions for different ground motions and different ARs in cases without vertical excitation, since the axial strain at the centroid of the section is not only affected by the axial force but also by the bending moment.
Among 3551 earthquake acceleration records in the PEER NGA database and discarding those records with only low-frequency content, 61 ground motions were selected as input candidates based on three criteria: (1) at least one of the horizontal components should have the PGA larger than 0.25g; (2) For the 20 pairs of periods Th-Tv (Tv=0.05, 0.1, 0.15, and 0.2 sec and Th=0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, and 0.8 sec), the PSav/PSah1 or PSav/PSah2 were calculated based on the ratio of the pseudo-spectral acceleration corresponding to the vertical component (PSav) to those corresponding to the horizontal components (PSah1, PSah2), where if one of these two ratios is larger than 1.0 in at least 15 pairs, the ground motion is selected as one of candidates; and (3) the arrival time interval between horizontal and vertical peak accelerations is considered, which affects the interaction of the horizontal and the vertical responses. The interval should be shorter than the cut-off of 1 sec.
A parametric study was conducted on columns designed with the modified effective circular section of Prototype 1 (ACB) and subjected to ground motions to evaluate the effect of vertical excitation. The following parameters were varied: ground motion, number of components, mass moment of inertia, and AR. First, 61 motions were applied. Second, three cases were considered, all three components versus two horizontal components, X and Z components versus X component, Y and Z components versus Y component. Third, the existence of the mass moment of inertia was considered, and its effect on the response examined. The mass moment of inertia of Prototype 1 (ACB) was applied to Type 2. Since Type 2-1 has no rigid end zone, it is identical to Type 1 except for the inclusion of mass moment inertia, and its lateral and rotational periods were obtained. Fourth, six ARs from 2.5 to 5.0 were taken into account.
The parametric study determined that: (1) the presence of two or one of the horizontal components does not produce significant differences; (2) except for Dz and Fz, the difference in other responses due to vertical excitation was not significant; (3) the effect of vertical excitation was significant in Fz, which could affect the shear strength for models Types 1 and 2; and (4) the difference in Dz or Fz between models Types 1 and 2 is relatively small. For other response parameters, the discrepancy between Types 1 and 2 becomes larger as the AR decreases. However, since the axial force is the only parameter that was significantly affected by the vertical excitation, it can be concluded that the differences between Types 1 and 2 (especially Type 2-1) may not be important for the purpose of this study.
The effect of axial force on the shear strength was investigated using different shear strength code approaches. Comparing the shear demand to the shear strength, the maximum ratio of shear demand and shear strength, Maxdcr, and the reduction of the shear strength due to the earthquake vertical excitation, Red, were calculated. Maxdcr of the column subjected to X+Y+Z (or X+Y) was larger than that subjected to X+Z, Y+Z (or X, or Y). For Maxdcr, Eurocode < ACI ≤ SDC < CSA, regarding the general order in estimates. Red due to application of X+Y+Z (or X+Y) was smaller than that due to application of X+Z, Y+Z (or X, or Y). For Red, CSA < SDC < ACI ≈ Eurocode, regarding the general order in estimates. Moreover, a smaller AR tends to have a larger Maxdcr, and a larger AR tends to have a slightly larger Red, i.e., it is reduced less. Note that ACI, SDC, and Eurocode documents explicitly consider axial force. CSA, however, takes the effect of axial force into consideration by using axial strain at the centroid of the cross section, resulting in differences in the shear capacity predictions for different ground motions and different ARs, even cases without vertical excitation. This is because the axial strain at the centroid of the cross-section is not only affected by the axial force but also by the bending moment.
Dynamic testing is the optimum method to replicate earthquake input motions. Due to limitation of facilities, to date only a few shaking table tests have been conducted to examine the effect of vertical acceleration on bridge columns. To perform tests on the UC Berkeley shaking table at the Richmond Field Station (RFS), 1/4-scale bridge column specimens, instrumentation, and input sequence were prepared to investigate the response of a bridge column subjected to the horizontal and vertical dynamic excitations.
The performance of the UC-Berkeley shaking table is acceptable to test the proposed mass and C.G. height of the 1/4-scale test specimen. Therefore, the proposed testing regimen is feasible unless bigger mass or higher C.G is utilized.
Among the four ground motions that were selected based on the analytical study, GM7 is the most suitable for dynamic tests with vertical excitation considering the shaking table characteristics.
The GM7-MCE level is the highest level that was applied in the fidelity tests; the response spectra suggest that the shaking table performance is still acceptable. However, based on the measured vertical accelerations this intensity level was found to be near the limits of the shaking table. Hence, sufficient performance is not expected if a stronger excitation is applied, or if a bigger mass or higher C.G is utilized. Therefore, the GM7-MCE level and the fidelity set-up mass and C.G height are considered as defining the upper limit for the excitation and specimen configuration in this study.
The dynamic tests to examine the effect of vertical excitation on shear strength of RC bridge columns were designed within capacity of the UC-Berkeley shaking table located at the Richmond Field Station. The 1/4-geometric scale for the test specimens as selected. To confirm shaking table performance, fidelity tests were conducted with steel beams and concrete blocks stacked on the shaking table. Even though the periods were not comparable to those of the scaled prototype, the mass of the shaking table—which weighed 118 kips, and the center of gravity 9 ft —were comparable to those of the test specimens. Four ground motions were selected from 80 ground motions, satisfying the first and second and criteria determined in Section 2.1. They were chosen based on capacity reduction (parameter Ted defined in Chapter 2) calculated using the ACI-318-11 equation and on comparison of demand and capacity history. A total of 30 trials were conducted and the input motion was finalized. The intensity limit of the applied motion was also identified.
Each RC column—SP1 and SP2—was designed as a 1/4-scaled prototype. Both SP1 and SP2 had a longitudinal reinforcement ratio of 1.563%, which is close to the prototype value. The transverse reinforcement ratio of SP1 was close to that of the prototype, but SP2 had 2/3 of that of SP1, achieved by adjustment the hoop spacing. The mass on the column was identical in both specimens. Assuming =4 ksi (27.58 MPa) and 6.5% axial load ratio and including miscellaneous weight, a 85.6 kip-weight (38.83 ton) was placed on each column. The total weight on the table was slightly over 100 kips (45.36 ton). The center of gravity of each specimen was about 8.5 ft (2591 mm) above the table. A base plate and prestressing rods were placed to hold the specimen at the center of the shaking table. Steel chains held the mass blocks to avoid unexpected movement that might cause safety concerns.
A total of 38 strain gages were installed on the reinforcing bars of each specimen. Eighteen gages were attached to the longitudinal bars and 20 gages were attached to the hoops. For external instrumentation, nine 3D accelerometers, nine 1D accelerometers, 4 load cells, 14 Novotechniks, 2 DCDT, and 19 wire potentiometers were used.
The 1994 Northridge earthquake recorded at the upper abutment of Pacoima Dam was selected to be applied to the test specimens with increasing intensity, from 5% to 125%-scale. The 2D excitation in X and Z was planned in most cases, but the 1D excitation in X was also planned to be applied in some cases as these 1D runs are helpful in observing differences in response due to the effect of the vertical excitation. The detailed test sequence will be discussed in Section 4.1.
This chapter presents the computational models developed in order to predict the response of the tested bridge columns. In addition to the conventional modeling of RC columns, a new shear spring was developed and implemented in the utilized computational platform, OpenSees [2000], in order to incorporate shear strength estimation based on ACI-318-11 [2011] or Caltrans SDC [2013] equations. Various response quantities obtained from the different models were compared with the test results to evaluate the developed computational models.
OpenSees [2000], a software framework for developing applications to simulate the performance of structural systems, provides a considerable number of material models. However, none of the existing models can be directly employed to model the variation of the shear capacity as a function of the axial force or the ductility as implied by the code equations such as ACI-318-11 or the Caltrans SDC. In this section, existing material models are discussed and a new material model for SDC or ACI-based shear springs is proposed.
First, the structural model including a column, a footing, mass, and springs for the load cells is discussed and the force-based beam-column elements used in the modeling, namely “Beam With Hinges” and “Nonlinear Beam Column” elements are described. Second, the material models for concrete and reinforcing bars are presented. Third, the fiber section modeling to capture the nonlinear behavior is presented. Finally, the computational results are compared with the test results reported earlier.
